Rock lobster industry.
Yeah, come to the table.
Morning.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
You are scheduled for
10 minutes.
The time is yours. Morning.
Morning. Morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee.
I'm Catherine Malloy, the Chief Executive of Crayate Rock Lobster Industry
Association. I've brought along Mark Edwards, who you'll know,
for any spicy questions.
We represent the Crayate fishery in Southern New Zealand.
Crayate is arguably the most abundant lobster fishery of anywhere in
the world,
but it wasn't always that way.
So if we start with one fishing pot, let's say it's yours, Mr. Chairman.
In 1992, if you pulled your pot from the waters of
Crayate, you would end up with less than one cray fish for dinner.
Our fishery was in critical condition.
Today, you'd pull up over 16 legal sized crays, which is
much more than a bag limit. And on a good day, my fishermen
tell me you'd often get over 150 cray fish in a pull.
This is what we mean by abundance. In Southland we say, if you're a
fisher or a diver and you can't catch a cray in Crayate-
... you should probably stick to fishing at Pattersons.
This didn't happen because the government mandated it.
Our organization, supported by our quota owners,
developed a rebuild management procedure that reduced the
TACC from 1,150 to
570 tons. We funded the science, we contributed the
data, and we held the line to rebuild the fishery to the
1,392 tons it is today.
The rebuild happened because of the tools we're asking you to formalize in
this bill.
The tools aren't about taking more, they're about managing smarter
and faster to ensure the future of our fisheries.
Crayate contributes $190 million in export earnings per
year. Yes.
But more importantly, we're the 65 fishing crews.
We're the young fishermen trying to build a life like their tupuna before them,
and we're the small regional communities like Rakiura Stewart Island,
where fishing isn't a lifestyle, it's a living.
There are four essential parts of this bill for us.
The most important is the recognition of management procedures.
Right now, without a management procedure, the TACC is
set and can be left unchanged for what can be five years to a
decade, regardless of what's happening in the water.
In a world of marine heat waves and mortality events,
a static TACC is a huge risk,
and that uncertainty has very real cost.
Picture a young fisherman sitting across from a bank manager and asking for a loan
of $3 million to buy a vessel. The bank manager leans
forward.
"What guarantee have you got that the fish will even be there in the future?"
It's a question he can't answer.
We're losing the next generation, not because they don't want to fish, but because
the system gives them nothing solid to build a business on.
The management procedures fix that.
It's a publicly consulted rule that adjusts the TACC each
year based on the most recent data.
It's not just CPUE, it's biomass, it's sex
ratios, and it's migration patterns.
If the biomass increases, then so does the TACC.
If it falls below a threshold,
the response is automatic and it's swift.
It's disciplined, transparent, and science-based management.
Crayate is the proof.
We've been running management procedures for 25 years, and they work.
Without the amendments, management procedures have no formal legislative
home, and without that, there's no guarantee we'll even be allowed
one in our next stock assessment.
We simply cannot run New Zealand's best fishery blind.
The second tool we need is a formal recognition of industry voluntary
measures, particularly catch shelving.
Catch shelving is where quota owners voluntarily set aside
catch to protect the long-term,
um,
health of their stocks. That kind of discipline deserves a formal place
in law. If you want a proactive industry that supports
abundant fisheries, you must give us the tools to enable it.
The third is tiered stock management.
The current framework requires the same process for every stock, regardless
of how much data exists. Not every fishery can be
Crayate. We measured 85,000 fish last
year.
Others can't do that.
Crayate will meet the highest data requirements and-
but fisheries with less should still get proactive management
rather than being thrown in the too hard basket.
Finally, carry forward, enabling unused catch to be carried into the following
season in a limited capacity with the majority of
quota ownership and agreement.
It's not about gaming the system. It's about flexibility when
disruption is beyond our control.
When COVID-19 closed China's live seafood market overnight,
our fishers couldn't land catch that was swimming in abundance right below
them.
The fish was there, the quota was there, the market was not.
Quota owners should not permanently lose their catch because of an event they had
no, um,
part in causing.
So our ask is clearEnsure management procedures,
recognition of voluntary measures and tiered stock assessments are
included. These are not untested theories, they're proven tools that are
internationally recognized as best practice, and they're
essential in regions of New Zealand where fishing is important
and it's not something that people only do if they can't golf.
We went from barely one crayfish per pot to over 16, and we did it with
management procedures, voluntary restraint and a commitment to doing the
right thing.
This bill backs the tools that are already working and gives them a place in
law, and we urge the committee to support the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Rachel has a question.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you Catherine, for your submission.
Got a question about the management procedures.
Mm-hmm.
I guess given that they are voluntary and can already be instigated-
Yeah
... what's the benefit of actually having them in law, given that you can do it
anyway?
So there's two major benefits. One is it formalizes the consultation
process around management procedures, and it gives us a way of
being able to bring multiple voices to the table when we're designing the
management procedures. The second one is we've seen a lot
of challenge to the use of management procedures, and we're already hearing for our
next stock assessment that we're unlikely to get a management procedure.
So for us, if the management procedures aren't formalized, there's
a real risk that we're only going to have
that stock assessment and then a wait until the next stock assessment.
Just to sup on that.
Yeah.
So
essentially the legislation would allow
overriding of the industry if the management procedure needed to be put in place.
Is that what it is?
That's already the case. Yeah.
So that can already happen?
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah. So, we design the management procedures.
So our CPUE's got a plateau in it as like a safety
net, and then we step up based on increases in
the biomass above that. If our management procedure
said, "Hey, you deserve an increase," but like what happened in Cray 7,
they showed two years' worth of
ability to increase the stock
before the
minister signed it off. So it's always going to be down
to the ministerial discretion, but
it gives us a way of designing what we think
the risk is. So for Cray 8,
our fishermen are really used to fishing at high abundance.
So we need to catch more in a pot than other
fisheries around the country.
Okay.
Yeah.
Just to sup on that. So with current management procedures-
Yeah
... are all fishers
within that quota,
compelled to
stick to what has been decided?
Yeah. The management procedure adjusts the TRCC.
So the standard mechanisms in the act apply that proportionally-
Right
... whether it's a decrease-
Yeah
... or an increase. As Catherine said, the important thing is to
give a recognition to management procedures as a tool and the act
that's, the provisions that are in there are actually, we think, quite well
designed. We haven't suggested any amendments.
They've got a proper process for their establishment.
They've got the ability to step out of them if a management
procedure doesn't perform. They're quite a complete tool
and it deserves recognition in the statute.
So even if they're opposed to the, say you
suggest a reduction.
Yeah. Like when we designed-
They are compelled to-
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So like our rebuild management procedure in '92,
that was two 20% cuts
over a four-year period. That management procedure was designed by Cray 8.
Okay.
So we knew the cuts were going to come if we got
that management procedure
in, if that makes sense.
Okay.
So we designed it that way. Yeah.
Thank you. And one last question, Sue.
Just quickly. You talk biomass. Does that mean measuring biomass?
Is that like-
It's like-
... using a detector to see how many fish are underwater?
No. Biomass as in like if you put all of the fish in a bucket,
how messy is it? If that makes sense.
Okay, cool.
Like what's the actual mass of the biology as in volume.
Right.
How do you determine that?
So we have a voluntary logbook program.
So we measure those 86, 85,000 fish a year for
the sex, size, tail width, and their location throughout
Cray 8. And then very clever scientists turn that
into how many fish they think is in the full area, and then
we have a proportion that we can harvest.
And that's
just for crayfish, it's not the entire biomass.
Yeah, yeah. Just for cray, yep.
Yeah.
But because we're pottering, we don't catch a lot of other stock.
Oh, one other thing. You
raised this thing about the interruption with COVID-
Yeah
... and also it happened with,
obviously there was significant issues as a result of Gabrielle.
Yeah.
So
in your mind, is the bill sufficient to manage
those-
Yeah
... processes?
Yeah.
Like to allow people to carry over their catch?
So I think there's a couple of-
In certain circumstances
... there's a couple of circumstances that Mark's put in his submission that
broaden it slightly, but from us, from a Cray 8 perspective, we actually
like it being quite tight. We don't want it to be something that people can
gamify or roll over if they think they can make more money next month.
We want it to be for things that are out of the fishery's control that don't have
an impact on sustainability.
Perfect. Thank you very much.
Okay, thanks. We've come to time.
Thanks.
Thank you very much for your submissions.
And next up we have Safe
and Emily Hall.
Are they
online?Supposed
to be.
Mm-hmm.
Morning, Emily. Welcome to Primary Production.
Good morning.
You have 10 minutes for your submission, and the time is yours.
Fire away.
Kia ora koutou. Ko Emily Hall toku ingoa.
I'm a campaign manager at SAFE, and we thank you for the
opportunity to speak today.
SAFE is Aotearoa, New Zealand's leading animal rights organization,
representing tens of thousands of Kiwis who value
compassion and expect animal welfare laws to be properly
enforced.
We oppose the Fisheries Amendment Bill and urge the committee to reject
it. Our main concern is that this bill prioritizes commercial and
industry interests over transparency, the welfare of
animals, environmental protections, and upholding legal
obligations.
My first point relates to animal sentience being ignored.
Fishes are legally recognized as sentient beings under the Animal
Welfare Act 1999, meaning they have the capacity to
experience pain,
fear,
distress, and a sense of wellbeing.
However, this bill creates a clear inconsistency between the
Fisheries Act and the Animal Welfare Act,
treats fishes as commodities rather than animals, does not require
fisheries decision-makers to consider fish welfare,
permits commercial fishing practices that cause prolonged suffering,
and undermines the New Zealand government's own legal recognition of
animal sentience.
My second point relates to the bill expanding management flexibility
without introducing welfare safeguards,
and as a result, practices causing severe and preventable suffering would
continue unchecked. This includes prolonged
asphyxiation during capture and landing,
crushing and barotrauma from rapid depth changes, and
handling, gutting, and processing without stunning.
Despite decades of evidence of harm to animals, fisheries
legislation does not mandate welfare standards for capture,
handling, stunning, or slaughter, and these practices are not meaningfully
addressed within fisheries management frameworks.
We submit that this constitutes harm by omission.
I'd like to briefly touch on bycatch, an issue in New Zealand that exposes
major regulatory failure. Non-target fishes are
injured during capture, exposed due to ear and pressure
trauma, and discarded dead or dying,
often without being recorded. In terms of
bycatch, this bill focuses on operational certainty rather than
recognizing bycatch injury and death as an
animal welfare failure.
Whilst fish farming is not primarily governed by the Fisheries Act,
this act does cover some aspects relating to this industry, and I'd like to
speak to this for a moment, because intensive fish farming is
simply underwater factory farming.
There are significant welfare issues associated with fish
farming, but this bill frames those issues as economic or
environmental issues rather than animal welfare issues.
Large-scale mortality events often occur without investigation,
any follow-up welfare assessment, or consequences for those
responsible, which, quite frankly, would be unheard of in any other farming
sector.
In terms of transparency and accountability, this bill
reduces public scrutiny, restricts access to onboard camera
footage, limits transparency around animal welfare outcomes,
and leans on voluntary industry-led measures over enforceable
standards, which in turn undermines public trust,
consumer confidence, and perhaps most importantly, New
Zealand's international reputation on animal welfare.
The bottom line here is that transparency must be central, not
optional.
We are also seeing these same issues reflected in parallel policy
settings, including the fast-tracking of large-scale fish farming
projects. That process is characterized by limited
participation, reduced transparency, and exclusion of fish
welfare expertise, despite clear and well-documented
welfare risks.
Fish farming developments can be advanced through a framework that effectively
sidelines animal welfare considerations at the point of
decision-making. Taken together with this bill, that signals a
broader policy direction that prioritizes industry over the
welfare of animals, environmental protections, and
democratic public scrutiny.
The International Aquatic Animal Alliance, of which SAFE is a member,
provided a submission on behalf of 174
organizations, warning from an incredibly well-informed,
expert international perspective that this bill will
weaken marine protections, reduce transparency, increase
reliance on industry self-reporting, expand
discarding allowances, and further marginalize
aquatic animal welfare.
The submission from this international alliance once again called for the rejection
of this bill or, at minimum, substantial amendment.
My final point relates to precedence and a perceived abuse of
democratic process. Sadly, the process undertaken for this bill has
mirrored repeated use by the coalition government of urgency-style
processes for non-urgent legislation and therefore
risks damaging the democratic process.
While not formally under urgency, the rushed consultation
timeframe undermines meaningful public engagement and
appears to abuse parliamentary urgency.This also raises
broader questions about process.
Under the current coalition government, we have seen various pieces of legislation
that impact the animals and environmental protections
progressed at pace despite substantial public opposition.
When that level of public input is not meaningfully reflected, it raises
serious questions around transparency and
accountability, leading to a significant decrease in
public confidence in the system and our democratic processes.
In conclusion, we would like to convey that this bill represents a significant
regression in fisheries governance.
SAFE urges the Primary Production Committee to reject the Fisheries Amendment
Bill in its entirety,
to ensure fisheries law aligns with the Animal Welfare Act, to
explicitly recognize fish sentience and fisheries management, and
commit to a future framework that reduces and ultimately
eliminates practices that result in the
suffering of fishes.
Fishes are legally recognized as sentient beings, and it is high time our
fisheries legislation reflected that reality.
Kia ora, thank you, and I welcome any questions.
Well, thank you, Emily. Do we have any questions, team?
Yes, Mr. Chair.
Mark.
Morning, Emily, and thank you, Mr. Chair, for your time.
Just cognizant of a few statements you've made this morning
in and around the recording.
I'm paraphrasing, of course, but I'm confused.
Do you believe, and is it the veracity...
Or I'll reframe it. Can you prove the veracity of the
statement that you said that the recording on commercial
boats was inadequate, albeit that there is cameras
and routinely MPI officials on
board? So do you
want to
give some feedback on what your thoughts
are because you've made some pretty asserting statements there,
Emily.
The bill, I believe,
intends to reduce the public access to onboard camera footage.
So, for example, if
a member of the public or someone from an organization such as SAFE
were to commit in the future to submit an Official Information Act
request
for onboard camera footage,
we would not be able to
receive that information, I believe.
That kind of answers it. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Okay. Any further questions?
No, there doesn't seem to be. Look, thank you very much for your time, Emily.
I appreciate it.
And have a happy day.
Thanks, guys.
Thank you. Thank you.
Right. We're moving on to the McGuinness Institute.
We have
Wendy and Josie, I think.
Wendy and Greta.
Oh, Wendy and Greta.
At the side.
Sorry.
We have a PowerPoint as well, which you only sent
it to us a few moments ago, so we'll do our best.
It's on, it's up.
It's up, which I'm very thankful. Thank you.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
You have 10 minutes and the time is yours.
Thank you very much. Okay. Hello, everybody.
Look, firstly, Greta, introducing.
She's our fact checker and one of the researchers at the institute.
So she's here to answer any tricky questions.
Right. Basically, we're after durable public
policy practice. So we don't want to see
things
be changed and then changed again in significant ways.
That's a very costly approach and creates a lot more
uncertainty, which of course, your objective is to reduce the level of
uncertainty.
Just wondering if there's a clicker?
Just asking for the next slide.
Oh, okay. Thank you very much. Okay.
Basically, there's some key points I wanted to put in really quickly.
Ocean is a living resource. It's not like a mineral asset, and
some of the debate that has been made by the
Crown and ministers and so forth
is, for me, they're sort of forgetting
why we're here.
Ocean function is an integrated ecosystem, so it's not like
dairy farming.
It's about the precautionary approach and the concept of
the full scientific certainty should not delay
action to prevent serious harm. So in other words, uncertainty
is used to reduce harm, not to
basically increase harm.
The ocean is a shared common good. It's not privately owned like other
resources. So that's an issue. It's under growing
threat from climate change, and I think this is really
forgotten. New Zealand is actually incredibly large in
terms of when you look at the jurisdiction globally.
We are
considered to be the fourth or fifth largest, and we
have a per capita
responsibility that is probably second to none.
It's massive. And we also have societies around the world
that don't have citizenship and then
also don't have rights to water. So we actually
have a massive responsibility and leadership role here that
is, I think,
misunderstood. Now,
the next slide that you have up here is basically just showing
I look for durable public policy. So I look for
historySo where is the history for
the Minister for the Environment and Conservation in this
dialogue? So you go back through the impact statements,
regulatory impact statement, departmental disclosure statements.
Even though oceans and fisheries is meant to be, the
description is sustainability of those resources,
none of the ministers or departments that are
responsible for sustainability are involved in any of
the impact statements.
So your credibility is diminished
because you haven't invited their comments.
And if you'd invited their comments, they're the ones that have the
expertise on sustainability. And that's why one of the
reasons we actually strongly advocate that the Minister of Oceans is
not the same minister for fisheries.
We think they need to be decoupled so that you
clearly, in terms of government going forward, that you actually have a
way of managing that.
This slide here looks terribly messy, but I think a
really-- Sorry, the one with the table.
Mm-hmm.
Is a really important point.
You talk about in the explanatory note in the act as though you've got two
variables, but you're actually dealing with three variables of uncertainty.
So this indicates to you that if you look at
the eight options of those variable things, you've only
got one that is in high information stock.
You've got three that are medium, and you've got four that are low.
And if that's your intention, that's fine, but I actually think
that's really problematic.
Then the next bit after that, this is a technical point, is
that you then have whether the trend is increasing, whether the
trend is the same or decreasing. So you've got three other further
options in that. So the permutations that you're dealing
with, you're putting forward in this approach, actually
has a lot of risk. I
didn't want to go any further, but I just wanted to
explain that the way that the bill in the explanatory
note is written is not technically correct
in terms of the variables and the different values you can have for
each variable. And I think that's really problematic.
The next thing is,
I really want business to have certainty.
I want New Zealand to flourish. I want the economic
development.
The problem is that we're increasingly having to deal with
uncertainty. So your ability to create this bill to
create uncertainty is actually challenged by the very
environment that we're heading into. Does that make sense?
So
it's like you
want to be here, but in reality, the uncertainty is
so much that you
can't be here. For example, with that table,
you could argue that all of those or every stock is
uncertain. And you might get another minister in
the next term or the term after that that will make that assessment,
and that will create a lot more uncertainty for the fishing
industry and for everyone else. So my point being is that you've
got to be really careful how you design
systems. The next point is around
the power to the minister. Now, I've always argued that you want to
make policy decisions central with ministers.
You don't want to make specific decisions,
operational decisions with ministers, because once
again, that creates a weakness in the system.
So you want to basically push down operational stuff, and
Parliament and MPs should be strategic.
And there's a real risk with that. So,
I've put a little screenshot about concern over change owns
favoring commercial industry mates.
I don't know whether that's true or not. I don't really care.
The fact is the uncertainty has been created, the
perception has been created, and you need to design the
bill in such a way to take that uncertainty out,
not just for this minister, but for future ministers.
So I've made a suggestion, something like the minister must, on an annual
basis, publish a list of all fish, seafood, and other gifts received from
commercial fishers. And I can say the current minister
has lots of them and has
has a very good appetite, as do I.
The checks and balances I wanted to put forward was
expanding the scope of actions
and offenses. So the penalties, I think that's still very
weak.
Establishing more marine reserves.
We have got this commitment that we have made, going back to my earlier point.
One way to
deliver
a more sustainable approach is to create
much more marine reserves and protect.
That is a mechanism and tool that's within your power and ability
to do.
Another check and balance is Schedule 8B, I think is
incredibly narrow. I put some suggestions in there.
I actually worked on a contract with Treasury many years ago.
Treasury is anything to do with numbers and
impacts.
Department of Internal Affairs, obviously local industry, Audit New
Zealand, Parliamentary Commission for the Environment, Ministry for the
Environment, Ombudsman, Climate Change Commission.
They are a few, but they should be on that
list because these are the easy hits, the
checks and balances that you can put in the system to create
durable public policy and informed officials across the
public service so that you get a bill that
works.Thank you.
Very good. Suz Redmayne.
Hi. Thank you very much for your submission and for your comprehensive written
submission. That was great.
I just was interested in your comment about why focus on
exports when they benefit such a small number of businesses
which are owned by international shareholders.
Do you not agree that exports benefit all New
Zealanders, like by bringing money in from overseas?
We're not getting rich selling houses to each other.
We actually need money coming in from overseas.
We don't. I know. I suppose, it was put to me another way.
If I had to choose between
minerals and mining versus fishing,
I would choose minerals and mining.
And I hate to say that, but that's my view.
Because you've got a
fixed product that you can manage that's not living.
It's not as vulnerable as a fishing industry.
So to go to your point,
we have a lot of companies that operate in New
Zealand in-
Yeah, I have something
... that are overseas,
um-
I can be very quick.
Yeah.
Oh, cool.
Oh, Suz had us up, so yeah. I-
Oh, no. You go.
I was just going to say, though, surely, in terms of carbon emissions,
though, this is a more sustainable option in terms of-
Yes
... you know, as an industry.
Yes, exactly. I think there's trade-offs.
I think the problem for me is that the bill
is being looked at in a very narrow scope,
and you haven't had the sustainability, but the
bill and the act requires. I mean, sorry, as
in the purpose of the portfolio requires.
And so, yeah, so there is a real
need to bring more expertise across all
facets.
Teanaru had a question very quickly.
Yeah. It was just around your comments around, and thank you
very much for the very precise submission.
It was just your comments around the minister consolidating
powers.
And so,
are you suggesting that we shouldn't have that,
or
would that be your preferred option, or are these other things that you're
talking about to sort of try to temper that?
I just struggled to hear that part.
Yeah, you've got very poor sound quality,
Teanaru.
Yeah. It was just around the consolidation of the powers with the
minister. You made a comment about that, and I was just wondering,
is your preference for that to be removed from the legislation,
or
what's the next best step there?
Powers of?
He's, the powers of the minister, what's your-
Yep
... preference?
Yeah. Oh, sorry. Thank you. Definitely, we've
always taken a view that
power in too few hands is
risky. You want checks and balances.
But more importantly, when the minister
has operational power, you
create
risk. What you want to do is push it down.
It's a little bit different. It's like the chairman and the chief executive.
So the chairman wants to think strategically.
He employs or doesn't employ the chief executive.
That is what the way that government should work.
MPs should think strategically. They should be asking
questions, like Suzy, around,
where does the economic value for New Zealand be?
Have we set up the systems right?
The minister should not be the system.
Thank you.
Thanks very much. We've come to time. I appreciate it.
Sorry, I could've keep going.
Oh, we love it. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much.
Appreciate your submission.
Really appreciate it. Cheers.
Thank you very much.
We're going to move on to Young Ocean Explorers, who are
via Zoom.
And I think we have a Steve Hathaway.
Is that you, Steve?
It is. Good morning. Hey, thank you for having me.
Good morning, Steve.
You've got 10 minutes.
Away you go.
Wonderful. Hey,
I'm Steve Hathaway, founder of Young Ocean Explorers.
I've spent over 40 years,
and many thousands of hours, underneath the surface of the ocean
around New Zealand. I'm a spear fisherman.
I'm also a professional underwater cameraman.
For the last 18 years, I've been fortunate to film for the likes
of Sir David Attenborough with Blue Planet II.
Having his
speaking over my footage is definitely a life highlight.
Regarding Young Ocean Explorers, it was formed 13 years ago
with my daughter Riley, who's now 25. She was 12 then.
The whole idea was creating stories to inspire this whole
generation of Kiwi kids to bring alive our
underwater story of New Zealand. And so initially it was a TV show, but
now we have an online platform that's used by thousands of
classrooms around New Zealand. Hundreds of thousands of
tamariki have used our content. It's
interesting, we've had a whole generation that have come through it now, which is
really, really cool.
Our goal is to ensure we have a thriving
ocean for future generations, and we're on the coalface
with Kiwi kids. We've personally given
presentations to over 150,000 kids around
Aotearoa,
and we're hearing regularly that this generation of kids are really concerned
about the planet and the ocean they're inheriting.
And this is part of what I want to speak to this
morningThey're the ones that are inheriting
this planet. They're affected by the
decisions we're making today.
Our big question for this bill on behalf of these children is,
does this bill help enable to give a thriving ocean for
future generations? Does this bill allow the health of the ocean
to go on an upward trajectory?
Does it ensure it is a better and healthier ocean for them?
And this is something I think we really need to consider in all our
decisions. We think it
doesn't. I want to take a little bit of a backward step just to give some
context about what we believe and our worldview
as an organization to give context to why we
oppose this bill. New Zealand is world renowned
for its beauty and its incredible flora and fauna, our keas,
kiwis, and kauri trees. Our national identity is built around
this. I've just been at the Raglan Surf Contest in the weekend.
New Zealand Tourism is a sponsor, and they're using the 100%
Pure brand. It is a world-renowned brand and a
magnificent country. We have our magnificent national
parks that ensure that we and future generations get to
experience firsthand the closest glimpse of what
much of New Zealand used to look like.
We have Predator Free 2050, where we're bringing back the bird song
all around Aotearoa.
And I'm amazed to see what's happening in our capital, hoping to be the
first capital in the world to be predator-free,
and they're releasing kiwi there.
Audacious goals and vision
that even if not fully achieved, they will definitely leave a better legacy for
future generations.
Yet amazingly, most of New Zealand is actually ocean, about 93% of
it, and it's thought over 80% of our natives live there.
This is just as much part of New Zealand
and our identity.
New Zealand underwater was once an incredible place
of abundance.
It was not uncommon to catch hāpuku from near the coastline.
New Zealand's legendary marine storyteller, he was like the Cousteau of New
Zealand, Wade Dove, said to me that
crayfish, he is one of the original divers, crayfish would have been as common as
cockroaches.
A very old friend of mine told me that he wouldn't stop
to have a fish at 90 Mile Beach until he saw the ocean was pink, where he
knew there's enough snapper that he would get a good feed.
These days are long gone
and something I've never experienced, but I've seen significant changes in
over 40 years in the ocean.
I've seen crayfish and scallops in abundance and something
that we thought would never run out.
They should be our God-given right as Kiwis to harvest.
But now in Northland, we're not allowed to take either of them,
as numbers are so diminished.
How has it been so poorly managed that it's got to this place?
We have underwater deforestation happening on a grand scale.
Our kelp forests disappearing along with the diversity of life found
within them. If this was happening on the land, we would not
tolerate it.
I've heard criticism pointing the finger at previous generations
that hunted moa to extinction, and of course, this would
be incomprehensible on the land in this day and
age. Yet in the last 30 years, we've
virtually brought New Zealand's underwater version of the moa to
extinction. The world's second-largest fish, the
basking shark, which in the '90s was still seen
in schools of hundreds off the Kaikoura and
Canterbury coast.
But now through accidental capture or bycatch, they're virtually
extinct.
This animal
is an animal that this generation of kids will probably never
see. Our forefathers would have found it incomprehensible that our
fisheries could be so mismanaged that it's come to this.
We've heard the saying,
"Without a vision, the people perish." We would
say neglect having a vision for a healthy ocean, and its
life will perish,
and this is what we're currently experiencing.
Unlike the land, which has a vision for abundance, there is no vision for a
healthy ocean. It's quite obvious about this in New Zealand.
There is a huge disparity between how we view and treat the ocean compared to
the land.
As an organization, we want the future of our ocean to
truly be great for future generations, but we have to make some
very intentional decisions to get there.
We look to have a vision for our oceans, and
we need to have a vision for our ocean and an ambitious goal of what it will
look like in the future.
New Zealand's ocean is just as much part of New Zealand as
the land, and it's quite possibly that it's every bit
as unique underwater, if not more so, with the amount of natives that we have
there. As an organization, we're not against commercial
fishing, as there are plenty of Kiwis that can't fish, but we're
against commercial interests being put above general public
interests and being put above general New
Zealanders.
The drive to make decisions that place more importance on profit
above what is best for the general public, we're against this stuff.
This bill does not address some of the serious underlying issues that has brought
New Zealand to this point or any of the destructive techniques we
currently use.
There are a couple of elements of the bill that I'd like to
specifically speak to.
Cameras on boats.
Not having access to cameras on boats.
We're strongly opposed that footage not being able to be
accessed by the publicMiraculously,
when there are either cameras or observers on boats
compared to boats with neither of these, history has shown reporting
captures on dolphins have gone up over
600%.
Seabird bycatch. These are species that
we are the albatross capital of the world.
We are the seabird capital of the world.
There's about 350 species of seabirds.
At least one third of them are found here, and about 10% nest
exclusively in New Zealand. This is our taonga that we
have to look after, and these are some of the things that have been
caught by bycatch that are
significantly under-reported when cameras are not present
or footage is not accessed.
We need to
know what has been taken. It will put pressure on
using less indiscriminate techniques that catch other
species that are precious taonga to New Zealand.
Quota's locked in for five years.
There was an example that's really close to home for me, living in the Hauraki
Gulf, and
the mother bed of all scallops was found on Cuvier Island in
2011.
Some people said, "We need to fish it because it's going to die out."
So the
catch allocation went from 22 tons to
325 tons in
2012.
From 2013 to 2016, it
was dropped to 100 tons. In 2016, it
went down to 27 tons.
Indeed, it quite possibly was the motherlode of all scallop
beds, possibly the bed that seeded the whole
area,
and now the whole fishery is closed.
We're opposed to
quota's been locked in for five years.
It's just too long a period, as we've seen in this one of many
examples of what has gone horribly wrong.
Interesting about this scallop,
the Cuvier bed, there was an article in the paper
when they were opening up the extra
quota. And it said, "The new commercial
catch limit was based on a comprehensive survey of the
beds and was sustainable."
Well, history tells us that is wrong,
and our concern is if we make decisions like that and we
say we--
comprehensive surveys and it's seen as sustainable and
it's locked in for five years, that could have a catastrophic
effect on different species. Not only the specie that's been
captured, but as an ecosystem, what effect does it have on the other
species around it?
Taking away public consultation.
The ocean is owned by New Zealand and not by
fisheries. A lot of the things around this bill seem to be
fisheries want them to make it easier to fish for them in a
depleted stock. And,
we need to have the checks and balances to make sure this is
managed properly. As we see history in New Zealand, the
fishery's gone severely backwards with some of the stories that I've talked about.
The things-
Steve, I'm sorry, I'm going to have to interrupt you there, but well over time now.
So-
Can I just finish on-- I've got two short letters from children that sent
us in, and I'm done.
Look, I'm sorry, we're really s-
Okay
... stuck for time, but I really appreciate your efforts and thank you
for your submission. It was quite a
detailed submission, so thank you for that.
Right. Committee, I just have to seek leave for
Grant McCallum to
sit in.
Yep. It's fine.
Okay.
Moving on. We've got Revive Our Gulf Trust
with
Mrs Katina
Economos.
Kia ora. Kia ora, Chair Mike. Thank you.
Just give her a second.
Just checking I-- the audio is working okay.
Yes, it's very good, thank you.
Kia ora.
You have 10 minutes. Away you go.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you very much for the opportunity
to speak today. I appreciate you have an enormous day ahead of
you.
My name is Katina Economos. I'm the Chief
Executive, the Kaihautū of the Revive Our
Gulf Trust.
Revive Our Gulf is a marine restoration kaupapa, working
to rebuild kūtai or green-lipped mussel reef
ecosystems in the Hauraki Gulf, Tikapa
Moana Te Moana-nui-a-Toi. I do use the term
kūtai and
mussels interchangeably with kūtai being one of the te
reo words for mussels.
Revive Our Gulf works in partnership with tangata whenua,
including Ngāti Manuhiri Settlement Trust, Ngāti Whātua
Ōrākei, and Ngāi Tai ki Tāmaki, and alongside our
science partner, Waipapa Taumata Rau, the University of Auckland
Institute of Marine Sciences. This submission is from
the Revive Our Gulf Trust. It doesn't represent the views of our
tangata whenua partners or our science partner or funders,
and I know you'll be hearing from Ngāti Manuhiri and the University of Auckland
later today.
Our interest in this bill is grounded in
practical experience. We are here because our
restoration work sits at the other end of the fisheries
management system. So we're working in a marine environment
where important ecosystem structures have already been
lostAnd where the task of trying to restore
them is complex, it's uncertain, and
it's expensive.
Sadly, Revive Our Gulf exists because of
degradation and loss.
We exist because habitats
that are vital to the productivity of fisheries and
the health of the marine environment have not been adequately managed or protected.
Kutai reefs were once extensive across the sea floor in the
Hauraki Gulf. In the early 1900s, there were hundreds of
square kilometers of Kutai reefs in the inner gulf, and that can
be really quite hard to get your head around now because our reference points have
really shifted so much.
These reefs were living structures that were three-dimensional.
They filtered water, stabilized the sea floor, supported biodiversity,
and provided habitat for other life.
And you can see some of the imagery behind me.
Those reefs were removed through historical fishing
practices, particularly dredging.
And since the 1960s, they have not recovered
naturally under the current management settings.
The Kutai reefs were removed before the current QMS was in
place. I do need to say that. But their failure to recover
under current management settings is the nub of my point
today. A fisheries management system that manages catch
but does not adequately protect habitat will
always fall short of true sustainability.
And this is not only a historic problem.
Steve from Young Ocean Explorers was just speaking about the
scallop fishery. So the recent closure of the scallop fishery shows
that even under the current QMS, shellfish systems can
decline to the point where closure becomes necessary.
Managing quota is not the same thing as managing ecosystem function,
and that's the context for our submission, is loss.
We are restoration practitioners working at the other end of that loss.
If I can, I'm going to try and share my screen.
I don't know if I'll be able to successfully do that.
Is that possible, Catherine? I think it is.
Is that possible? Not possible? Okay. I was going to share a video with you.
I'll just try and illustrate it in words. We have cameras.
When we do restoration experiments, we have to obviously monitor them to
see how they're going, and we put cameras over the side of the boat
and go down to our restoration experiments.
So we spend a lot of time looking at the sea floor,
and I have some footage I can share.
I can circulate that to you
after my presentation. But I've got a particular
grab from the inner Hauraki Gulf that shows the sea floor heavily sedimented,
and that's on a good day because you can actually still see the sea floor.
We do experience many days down there where it's like a total
whiteout and you don't get much visibility at all.
But I've got a clip that shows
the sea floor heavily sedimented and then one of our restoration
experiments, and it does show our Kutai
still in a heavy layer of sediment and precariously hanging
on. So my point, I guess,
in wanting to share some of that footage with you is that the current
sea floor, the condition of the sea floor is a really limiting factor
for ecosystem recovery.
Fine sediments, we hear a lot about sediment.
I know you do in many
different hats that you wear throughout Parliament.
But sediments can smother mussels and inhibit survival at
both the juvenile and the adult stages.
And so what that means is these ecosystems aren't simply
bouncing back. An active intervention is required,
and even then, success is uncertain.
And that experience shapes how we view this bill.
We're big advocates for ecosystem-based management.
Revive Our Gulf does not consider that the Fisheries Amendment Bill before
you represents a credible or sufficient step towards
ecosystem-based fisheries management in
Aotearoa, New Zealand. I acknowledge that the bill is intended to
improve efficiency, flexibility, and responsiveness
within the fisheries management system.
But from our perspective,
the central issue is not whether the current system can be made more flexible.
The central issue is whether the system can actively
support healthy, resilient marine ecosystems,
and that it needs to include addressing cumulative effects, protecting
habitat, and creating the conditions for both sustainability and
recovery. We do not think this bill adequately addresses
these challenges.
In our written submission, we raised four main concerns, and today I really
want to focus on the central one, the need for ecosystem-based management.
Kutai are only one species, but they do not live in
isolation.
They cannot
recover just because we manage how many are taken.
They need somewhere to live. They need clean water, suitable seabed
conditions, and a wider marine
ecosystem, if you like, that supports their survival, their reproductive
processes, and their recovery. And the same is true across the entire
marine environment. It's true for tipa, for scallops, for
paua, for kina, for taumare, snapper, the sea horses, the
sponges, the seaweeds, kelp forests, shellfish
beds, and the many small organisms that make up the food
web.
These species do not exist in isolated units.
They exist in ecosystems, and that's why fisheries management
cannot continue to focus on individual stocks, catch settings, and
operational flexibility. We need fisheries management that
protects the places, the processes, and the
relationships that marine life depends upon.
We need ecosystem-based
management.Section 9 of the Fisheries
Act already points in this direction to some extent.
It requires decision-makers to take into account environmental
principles, including maintaining biological
diversity and protecting habitats of particular significance for
fisheries management.
But the outcomes show us that those principles are not being delivered well
enough.
I would also like to make a brief point about litigation.
When introducing this bill, the minister described it as placing
litigation within more manageable guardrails.
In recent years, litigation has been used to test whether
fisheries decisions are properly taking into account evidence,
sustainability, habitat considerations, and the environmental
principles already set out in the Fisheries Act.
If the concern is that the fisheries decisions are ending up in
court, the answer should not be to weaken
scrutiny. The answer should be to strengthen the
quality, transparency, and ecological basis of
decision-making so that decisions are robust in the first place.
That is the gap this bill should be closing, but it does not.
As you would well know, we have such precious,
precious parliamentary time in Aotearoa to make and amend
law.
In our view, using that time to make modest operational
changes to a system that has already failed to protect marine
ecosystems is not good enough. The most pressing issue facing our
marine environment is not a lack of administrative flexibility, it's
ecosystem degradation.
And that degradation is made more urgent by climate change, warming
waters and ocean acidification and changing ocean conditions place
much more pressure on an already degraded system.
So our experience in the Hauraki Gulf shows that restoration is
difficult, it's costly, and it's uncertain.
We're working hard on that restoration, and there is hope in the work.
I do want to convey that. But one of the clearest lessons is this:
it's far better to protect marine ecosystems than to try and rebuild it
once it's lost. And for those reasons, we do not
support the bill.
Sue,
do you have a question? Make it very quick.
No, no, no. No, you go. Oh, no,
you answered it, actually, so thank you. It was about ecosystem basically.
Well, Teanau, you've got a question. Make it very quick.
We've only got about 30 seconds.
Yeah. Thank you very much for your
well-informed and very clear submission.
You talked about the connection between habitat
and catch.
And I wanted to know,
if there was a good piece of legislation that was coming through the House,
what would that need to focus on?
So I keep coming back to the words ecosystem-based management.
I guess it's
ensuring that we view the whole system, all
parts of the system, in order to
set up a healthy fisheries operation.
And that-
Well, thank you very much, Katina.
We've come-
Kia ora mate
... to time. And thank
you very much for your time.
Kia ora.
Right, we'll move on. We've now got
Whangawaukena ki Onehoto
Takutai Kaitiaki
Trust. Sorry, it's a mouth full, huh?
Well done. Well done.
Kirin
Goldsmith.
This is going to be via Zoom as well.
Yeah.
Morena, tatou.
Good morning.
Morena.
Morena. I'm here also with my fellow trustee, Te Amahia
Walker. So hopefully she's able to-- You can see her
as well? If not, we'll continue.
Carry on.
Video's not on.
Your video's not on, I don't think, Kirin.
Oh, my video. My video. My video. Here. Sorry.
Far away.
Ka pai.
Ka pai. Morena. My name is Kirin Goldsmith, and I'm speaking on behalf
of Whangawaukena ki Onehoto Takutai Kaitiaki
Trust. It is the recognized management trust for Whangawaukena
ki Onehoto rohe moana.
We appear here today as a statutory entity
established under the Nga Rohe Moana o Nga
Hapu o Ngati Porou framework to support hapu
exercising kaitiakitanga within our rohe moana.
So I'm not going to repeat our submission.
I'm just merely going to raise points.
We're not opposed to the fisheries reform.
Rather, our submission supports improvements to the fishery system,
provided those changes operate consistently with the statutory
and deed-based recognition arrangements already provided
and agreed between Ngati Porou
and the Crown.
Our submission is grounded in a simple
but critical position. Efficiency and
responsiveness cannot come at the expense of
existing legal recognition
legislation, hapu authority.
It might be-
Haven't been behaving themselves lately.
It'll be the connection on the Ngati Porou area that needs to be- Maybe turn your
video off. Maybe turn the camera off and we can then--
Because as long as it's audio, because often the cameras make the audio
worse.
Yeah. Carry on, Kirin.
Oh, there she is. Oh, no. Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Yep.
That's amazing, because I'm connected via Starlink, so that's quite
amazing.
Ah, hang on.
That explains it.
So you just carry on anyway, Kirin.
We know you're there
Okay. So the Ngā Rohe Moana o Ngā Hapu o Ngāti Porou Act,
and the Deed to Amend the Deed of Agreement 2017 bind
the Crown.
They establish a bespoke framework that must be taken into
account whenever fisheries decisions or decision-making
affects our rohe moana.
Those obligations apply throughout the legislative development, not
just at implementation, and they are not displaced by generic
public consultation processes.
Our primary concern is not any single clause, but the
cumulative effect of the bill. As drafted, the
bill would reduce scrutiny, it would compress
participation time frames, concentrates discretion
with decision-makers, and limits accountability.
Considered together, these changes risk narrowing the
practical space in which hapū are able to exercise their
authority
and responsibilities that Parliament has already recognized.
From a kaitiaki perspective, this is significant.
The recognition framework was designed to operate in practice,
not just on paper.
Process matters because process is how recognition is
given effect.
We also wish to emphasize that process associated
with this bill does not enable tikanga consistent
decision-making by whānau and hapū.
Although an extension to submission time frames was granted, the time
frame remains insufficient for the collective
deliberation and mandate-forming processes that
tikanga requires. For this reason,
Whangaūkena ki Onepoto Takutai Kaitiaki Trust does
not purport to speak on behalf of whānau and hapū on every
aspect of this bill.
Our ability to do so has been constrained by the absence of
consultation specifically required under the Ngā Rohe
Moana legislation and the Deed.
That constraint arises from process failure,
not from a lack of interest or engagement by hapū.
This brings us to a fundamental issue.
Under the 2019 Act and the Deed,
the Crown, through the Ministry of Primary Industries,
was obligated to consult whānau and hapū of Ngāti Porou,
as well as their recognized management entities, of which includes
ourselves, Whangaūkena ki Onepoto Takutai
Trust.
And
their obligation was to engage with us on any amendment to
fisheries legislation that affects the recognition and fisheries
mechanisms. That consultation did not occur
prior to the introduction of this bill.
This is not merely a procedural irregularity.
It is a breach of statutory and deed-based obligations owed to
Ngāti Porou hapū.
The Crown cannot meet those obligations by treating hapū as one voice among
many in a generic public submission process.
Accordingly, we ask the committee to acknowledge this breach and
to recommend that the bill not proceed in its current form until
the required consultation has been completed.
In closing--
Oh, I guess, just to give you an example
of
the time constraints that are currently being used, just the other
day we received, on the 12th of May, a
proposal for the introduction of new
infringement
offenses for fisheries management measures.
And the intention around that proposal is to include
that as part of this Fisheries Amendment Bill,
and we were invited to make submissions by the 29th of May.
So all of those things that I've just raised,
you can see
how that doesn't
enable us to have considered time
to make proper submission and provide a
response back to those things.
So in closing, our submission is not about stopping reform.
It is about ensuring reform proceeds in a way that
honors existing statutory commitments and does
not hollow out the recognition arrangements Parliament
has already enacted. Thank you for the opportunity to
appear, and happy to answer any questions.
Right. Do we have any questions?
It was pretty- No ...
very clear. Very clear in what you stated.
I think
it was a very good submission. So-
Kia ora
I thank you very much for your time.
Thank you.
And
your submission will be given due consideration when we
deliberate on the bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Goodbye. Kia ora.
Right. We next move on to Dunedin Museum of
Natural Mystery
with
Bruce Mahowski. I think I've pronounced that right.
If you could turn your
speaker on, please, Bruce.
No, you're still on mute. There we are.
Okay.
You got 10 minutes, Bruce. Away you go
All right, kia ora. Thank you for letting me speak.
So this museum is a charitable trust based in Dunedin,
made up of scientists and museum people
operating a small museum in Dunedin.
We as a group, as a committee, reject the bill in its entirety.
I used to work in fisheries research at NIWA at Greta Point,
and we've been trying to get cameras on boats for many, many years.
This bill would seek to ban public access to this boat footage, which we think
is important, and would fine anyone leaking that footage up to
$50,000. So,
yeah.
It's a long
road we've been down trying to get cameras on boats with this kind of access.
Many countries have banned destructive bottom trawling, but this bill wants to
ignore its impacts. It's like driving a bulldozer over the
ocean floor and the benthos, the marine ecosystem on the ocean floor.
It takes years to recover each time.
Seamounts are like oases in the desert, and the bill could wipe many of them out,
with just nets cleaning off them left and right.
And these are the
important parts of the ocean which sort of fertilize other parts of the ocean
around them. The bill allows more fish to be dumped overboard and undersized
fish to be held, and it slashes fines for commercial fishers who exceed
their catch limits. It also increases commercial catch limits
when our fragile ocean ecosystem is already struggling to
cope with the massive impacts of climate change.
We've destroyed many of the world's coral reefs, and the rest will soon be
gone. Many species are struggling to adapt to devastating
marine heat waves and increasing ocean acidity, which is affecting the
food supply of the many marine species.
Just when the ocean's ecosystem is teetering on the brink of collapse,
you'd want to grab what's left, and I'm addressing this to the current government.
This approach seems to be typical of this government, who
seem to have little respect for science or statistics,
and seem hell-bent on maintaining the status quo when it's leading us all to hell.
Is there any environmental protection you haven't got rid of yet?
You've repealed the Natural and Built Environment Act 2023 and the
Spatial Planning Act, effectively reversing modern environmental reforms to
return to the older Resource Management Act, which you've also been tweaking.
You've got rid of the clean car discount, removed Auckland Regional Fuel Tax,
and opened up offshore and oil gas exploration.
You've gutted Te Mana o te Wai,
which reduces the priority given to drinking water and protection of freshwater
ecosystems. You've abolished the Environmental
Legal Assistance Fund. You've cut the
Community Environment Fund, and now you want to shut down the Ministry for the
Environment as well as regional councils.
You screwed with the Conservation Act to make it easier for conservation
land to be disposed of or sold for mining or development.
You've mucked with the Wildlife Act so that miners and developers can
kill
native species on the roads and during operations.
And you've just created a loophole to get around Mike Smith's important case.
So is there any environmental
thing you haven't got rid of yet? Honestly, shame on you.
Is that finished?
Yeah. I think I'm finished. Yeah, I had to have a go.
Good on you.
Right.
Any questions?
No, there doesn't seem to be any questions.
Great shirt, though. Really.
Thank you. Made it myself.
Oh, awesome.
Thank you, Bruce.
Right, cheers.
Thank you.
Bye.
Moving on to Canterbury Regional Council.
Now, that'll be a Zoom as well.
Hello.
Can you see me okay?
No.
I'm not sure why that is doing that. Sorry. Apologies.
Oh, dear, oh, dear.
I'm not sure why it's not showing me.
Apologies, just one moment. I'm on a very clunky
computer at home.
Is there a camera icon somewhere?
No, I had it on before, and it's just shut itself off, and I'm not sure.
Oh, well.
You just talk anyway, Genevieve.
Okay, I may start.
Fire away.
Okay.
Tena koutou, Chair, members of the committee.
Ko Genevieve Robinson ahau.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to the Canterbury Regional
Council's submission on the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
Canterbury Regional Council has significant responsibilities for
protecting indigenous biodiversity, protected species, and
managing cumulative effect in our coastal marine area.
Now, in Canterbury, these responsibilities are substantial.
Waitaha Canterbury has the largest coastal marine area
jurisdiction of any regional council in this country.
More than 40% of our jurisdiction is coastal
marine area,
and that includes national significant ecosystems, our
marine reserves, the Mataitai, Tuapiri,
and the Banks Peninsula Marine Mammal Sanctuary,
established for the sole protection of Hector's dolphins.
Now, because of that scale, the council has serious concerns
about aspects of this billIn practice,
parts of the proposal risk undermining our ability to give
effect to obligations under the New Zealand Coastal
Policy Statement. In particular, Policy 11,
which relates to indigenous biodiversity and threatened species
protection.
That creates a significant tension here between
fisheries management settings and regional coastal management
responsibility.
The council recognizes the importance of the fishing
sector to regional economy. However, healthy
fisheries depend on healthy marine ecosystems.
Our core concern is that several aspects of this
bill move fisheries management away from
ecosystem-based management.
In particular,
the council is concerned about the narrowing of the total
allowable catch considerations,
the reduced transparency around the onboard cameras,
and the increased flexibility around annual catch
entitlement carrying forward.
One of the council's strongest concerns relates to the
proposed narrowing of the considerations used when setting these
limits.
So marine ecosystems are in fact interconnected here.
Fish stocks do not exist independently from marine
mammals, sea birds, benthic habitats, or their wider
ecosystem functionings, including that of regional
councils.
The council is concerned that narrowing these risks, it
increases risks
and does not consider effectively wider ecosystem
health or the effects of increasing accumulative
pressure on the marine biodiversity.
The council also previously supported the
rollout of these onboard cameras because
they improve the transparency, the science
from that transparency,
species protection, and the information available
for sciences and the fisheries management
decisions. While we acknowledge privacy
and commercial sensitivity concern, exempting
footage from the Official Information Act
risks reducing our own transparency and
undermining public confidence in the fisheries management
system itself.
The council is also concerned that increased
carry forward flexibility for annual catch
may increase pressures on these systems, including
threatened species which we are obligated to protect.
Finally, the council recognizes Ngāi Tahu
as holding rangatiratanga and kaitiakitanga
within the rohe moana of Waitaha Canterbury,
and supports meaningful engagement with mana whenua and
mana moana on decisions affecting these marine coastal
systems.
In closing, Canterbury Regional Council supports a
fisheries management system that is economically productive,
science informed, and environmentally
sustainable. But the council considers this bill
should not weaken ecosystem safeguards,
reduce transparency, or undermine our own
regional council's ability to protect under the New
Zealand Coastal Policy Statement.
Thank you very much, and apologies for the camera.
Right. We'll go to questions.
I have one, and it was about the carry forward
that you
talked about in your submission. Could you run
us through what your concerns are specifically in
the carry forward practices?
Well, it's all about cumulative pressure and
carrying it forward into another financial year, which is
1st of October onwards.
It increases the ability of
not taking into account
what is happening at that moment and putting extra pressure on the
forward year. And the council does
not accept that as something
within our own jurisdiction.
Is there any further questions?
Yeah. Start with that.
Can I just supplement in terms of the carry forward, because if the
analysis showed that there wouldn't be any impact on the
stock sustainability for carry forward, like in some cases
there could be, in some cases there wouldn't be.
Would you support it in those circumstances?
So if there was actually some analysis to show that
carry forward wouldn't actually have
an impact on the sustainability of the stock?
I would need to see,
I guess the...
We would need to see the assessment of that.
But our main core concern is how that
could affect indigenous biodiversity going forward.
And we need to look at everything as an ecosystem-based approach.
So we can't look at something just independently like that going
forward without looking at the whole picture, if the other
jurisdictional requirements are taken off
us.
So that sounds more though like an issue of the ecosystem
interaction rather than the carry forward process.
So
I understand what you're saying. However,
what this bill actually doesn't tease out in detail,
but is clear in effect, is that the Fisheries
Amendment Bill and the changes in here-Do
in fact,
not just meet up with regional council's obligations, it actually
overrides them.
And so when you start
looking at the bringing things forward and not looking at the whole ecosystem
approach,
within the 12 nautical mile jurisdiction, we've got an issue.
Thank you. We've got a question from Suz Redmayne.
I was just pointing to part of your submission.
It starts referring to the total
allowable catch limits, and it's sort of mainly on the start of
page three. You said the bill seeks to narrow the
scope of TAC decision-making to the effects of commercial
fishing on the abundance of stocks at the level of the quota
management area. What do you actually mean by that, removing the broader
ecosystem consideration? What's your
interpretation?
Well, we can't just look at fish as a single thing.
We need to look at the whole overall situation of the ecosystem
health.
The apex species, you look at, say, Hector's dolphins
and how that could affect that. So we're
obligated to look after indigenous biodiversity.
Fisheries looks after the fishery stocks.
But when they actually overlap-
That's right
... we need to consider the effects of that on the
indigenous biodiversity.
So do you acknowledge that the reporting and the
recording of data and the availability of data has actually improved
significantly over recent years?
Do you mean with regards to fish stocks or the fact of on more cameras?
Oh, and the ecosystem. Yeah.
I
could speak personally or I could speak to the submission.
They're very similar. However, I believe the
reporting of fish stocks, yes, probably since the
Tarakihi's decision, has actually helped.
But once again, we talk about legislation and
case law,
and I think that is where we've seen the data and with
cameras on boats. And so we start interfering with that, then
the sciences get questioned, don't they?
Thank you.
Grant. Yeah. Thank you. Yeah. Just around the cameras on
boats, and you just touched on it there at the end.
Are you fundamentally saying, because it appears to me that this is
about a lack of trust
in keeping this footage away from the public.
So that it's about trust in the system. Is that basically your assessment?
I think the cameras on boats actually did probably a number of
things, but the key thing that it did do was actually
acknowledge the concerns that were raised
before they were actually put on boats.
Yep.
And so it's actually confirmed what was probably already known, if
not actually confirmed for the worse.
And so if we start limiting the ability of those
cameras, the footage available, then we start actually not being
able to look into what's going on in our own takiwa.
And that also gives effect to what we can do as a regional
council under the Logoima laws as well.
The Official Information Act
is information that's used for everything, including sciences
in your own backyard. And so
it is a trust issue, but it's also something that's warranted,
necessary, and if more so in this day and age,
to actually hold people to account for
what they've done or haven't done.
And it's really showing that people are pulling up their socks.
Yeah. I acknowledge that. But surely the-- Because obviously you've got the
privacy of the workplace, right?
Yes.
I don't think anyone really wants cameras in their own workplace for everyone to
come and have a look at what they do every day.
So in this case, couldn't we have a system whereby
there was an independent office of parliament, say, that actually kept an eye
on and audited what was happening with MPI's
analysis of that data and the cameras so that we didn't have to then make it
available for individuals to have their
work life exposed to the general public?
I understand that element of it, and that would
be something to be mindful of and to look at.
But the independence is paramount.
All data and sciences that are collected as a council or
a government are actually public.
But scrubbing the name off someone or their
privacy or blacking that out is warranted in many
cases, and I agree with that. But if it's showing something
that is accumulating and is happening more often, then
maybe it needs to be looked at in more detail.
And that's what's happening, I believe, in the cameras on boats.
It's showing things that were feared
and justified, and now we see them, and then suddenly
we may not. I'm not sure if that's probably where we should be heading.
Thanks, Genevieve. We're well over time.
Yeah. No, fair enough. Thank you very much.
I appreciate
your submission. Thank you very much.
Thank you. I just want to acknowledge Grant because I saw him at the Marine Policy
Forum the other day, and it was really good to-
Ah. Thank you.
Anyway.
Appreciate it.
Thank you very much. Okay.
Thank you.
Bye-bye.
Right. We're moving on to Climate Justice Taranaki, and
we have a little slight change from the agenda. We've got a Dr.
Lyndon
Devantier will be speaking as opposed to
the
person on the agendaAh.
Good morning.
Tena.
Welcome to the
committee.
You've got 10 minutes. Fire away.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak
on behalf of Climate Justice Taranaki this morning.
I'll be as quick as I can and hopefully leave some time
for some questions.
So Climate Justice Taranaki, we're strongly opposed to the
Fisheries Amendment Bill. We request that it be rejected in
full and does not proceed into legislation.
If passed into law, this would further enable unsustainable
extraction. It would also further erode the ability of
regulators to responsibly manage fisheries and
restore overexploited species and damaged
marine ecosystems.
It would also weaken the public and independent parties' abilities
to assess fisheries and, if necessary, legally
challenge decisions.
Ministerial overreach.
Fisheries science is complex and reliant on robust
long-term data.
While high information stocks allow for relatively precise
modeling to inform management,
albeit with caveats,
extra caution is needed when managing medium to low
information stocks.
It is imprudent for the bill to enable the minister to set
rules to decide or choose one set of data or
information over another as being reliable.
Section 13G.
Ministers are politicians, not fisheries scientists.
Such ministerial overreach is prone to industry lobbying,
risking regulatory capture.
For a stock that is deemed low information, the bill states that the minister
must set a total allowable catch that is
not inconsistent with the objective of management of the
stock at or above a level that
can produce the maximum sustainable yield.
Section 13D ( 2 ) .
But current legislation requires the minister to apply the
precautionary principle
in cases of inadequate information.
The new wording weakens this obligation to ensure fish stocks are being
managed at a sustainable level.
CJT also objects to the minister's ability to set
total allowable catch for multiple years,
Section 14D,
and for quotas to roll over automatically, also
Section 14D.
In a fast changing world with increasing marine heat waves,
ocean acidification and deoxygenation, and evidence of
ecological breakdown, fisheries management should be agile and
adaptive and take an ecosystem approach,
with the ability to provide rest and recuperation to heavily targeted or
sensitive species and/or areas when needed.
The depletions of east coast tarakihi and orange roughy on
the eastern South Chatham Rise are examples of the need for
more,
not less careful management.
The recent legal case by Forest and Bird challenged the minister's total
allowable catch decisions, successfully arguing that fisheries
legislation required the rebuild timeframe to be based on science,
environmental conditions, and the fish's biology.
High Court 2021 ruled in favor of Forest and
Bird, declaring that the minister acted unlawfully by ignoring
ministry policies and relying on a voluntary commercial plan
to set the catch limit.
A question for the select committee's consideration: Is this bill
in part aimed at nullifying the effect of that ruling?
In contrast, at the local scale, iwi and hapū led
rahui, such as the Western Taranaki Rahui on
shellfish, are recognized by the Fisheries Act as temporary
fisheries closures under Sections 186A and
B.
These closures restrict or ban specific fishing methods
or
the harvesting of particular species in designated areas and are having
successes.
Losing the war on nature.
The bill weakens key environmental principles in Section
13F,
specifically ecosystem protection.
Commercial fisheries bycatch
including marine mammals, sharks, sea birds, turtles,
and corals.
Research by the Environmental Law Initiative revealed that commercial
fishing operations killed over 146 dolphins and seals
inside New Zealand's marine mammal sanctuaries in the
last two years.
Many of these species are globally threatened.
New Zealand has the obligation to protect and
support the recovery of threatened species under the
United Nation Convention on Biological Diversity.
Recovery times for critical habitat subject to bottom trawling,
such as seamounts, which support high biodiversity, including
threatened species, are decades to centuries.
We've given the citations in our written submission.
On the Chatham Rise, Clark et al. 2022 stated,
"Recolonization and regrowth of deep sea corals on previously
heavily trawled deep sea features
can take place, but recovery is slow, with the first
detectable signs of coral recruitment and regrowth
occurring decades after the cessation of
trawling."While such observations of the early
stages of recovery are encouraging, full
recovery is by no means certain and would still be
likely to take centuries rather than decades.
As another example, Orcutt et al stated that deep sea
corals, like trees on land, are keystone species in their habitats,
providing crucial structure for other forms of life.
How can we restore a baseline that we have never observed?
The deep sea operates on a profoundly slower timescale than
ecosystems on land.
In addition to direct habitat destruction, the
documentary "Ocean" with David Attenborough is well worth a watch.
Bottom trawling releases large amounts of carbon from long-term
storage in sediments.
Attward et al 2024 stated, "Using satellite
inferred fishing events and carbon cycle models, we find that
55% to 60% of trawling induced aqueous
CO2 is released to the atmosphere over seven to
nine years." A 2025 article in "The Lancet"
stated, "This trawling induced climate impact undermines the
EU's and other European countries net zero
goals,
as oceans are critical carbon sinks."
A majority of New Zealanders do not want bottom trawling, and it is directly
counter to our global commitment to protect 30% of land and
ocean by 2030
since the UN Convention on Biological Diversity Conference in
2022.
New Zealand's and humans more generally will not win
the war on nature.
Undermining democracy.
The bill weakens the already inadequate control and transparency
needed to protect our marine environment, fishing stocks, and future
sustainability of food supply.
The explicit exclusion of onboard camera footage
from the OIA
removes interested parties ability to assess commercial fishing
operations. The OIA already
offers withholding grounds to protect legitimate interests
of commercial sensitivity. There is no
justification to lock away onboard camera footage from the
public through the bill,
especially when self-reporting by the fishing industry
is demonstrably not trustworthy.
For example, Bremner et al noted unobserved
vessels reported catches were significantly different to
observed vessels catches. There was clear evidence of
misreporting in the hoki fishery.
Misreporting deprives stakeholders of rentals, distorts
catch statistics, and threatens the integrity of quota
systems.
To further undermine democratic rights, the bill limits the
period allowed for judicial review to within 20 days
from when a decision was made
in Section 313A,
undermining challenges to a fisheries decision.
Conclusion. Critically, to tile encompassing all of nature,
ecosystems, biodiversity, and the climate is under extreme
rapidly increasing stress,
as are people who rely on it for livelihoods, wellbeing, and
reliance.
Literally, fishing corporations are eating the future,
eroding the potential for recovery of habitat and dependent
fish stocks, and the opportunities of future
generations for responsible harvesting.
Rather than further exploiting and extracting from it for
corporate profits, it is the government's duty to
make sure that it is protected and its life supporting capacity
restored for all,
including future generations.
CJT is therefore strongly opposed to the bill and
request that it be rejected.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Lyndon. Do we have any questions?
Yep.
Teanau.
Thank you, Lyndon. Thank you for your very, very clear
submission, and for all the detail that
is in there.
And I definitely agree with the direction you're taking.
I was wondering if there was going to be
legislation on fisheries,
what would be the first thing you would suggest to the committee that we
should be thinking about?
Well, there's so many things, but ecosystem-based management,
it's ludicrous to have all of these stocks assessed
independently with no considerations of the habitats and the
ecosystems and the interconnections that exist.
Bottom trawling is clearly incredibly destructive, and
allowing the bottom trawling of seamounts, even though about half are protected
within the EZ, is in my mind
just
wrong and demonstrably wrong in terms of recovery
times
of the species involved. There are things there we don't even know the names
of.
We're wiping out species before we even have described
them. It's appalling.
Right. Thank you very much, Lyndon. We're over time.
I appreciate
the efforts of putting forward a
submission, so thank you very much.
We'll move on now to
Moana New Zealand, and we have
Mr. Mark Ngata, I
believeNow, if it's going to be filmed,
we'll need leave
to be approved. No?
No, maybe not. It's okay for-
No, we're public. It's in public.
If the public is filming, it's okay. Yeah.
It's difficult to capture him that way.
Right.
So welcome to the select committee.
You have
10 minutes, so the time is yours.
Kia ora, Mr. Chair. Tena koe. Tena koutou katoa.
Ko Mark Ngataitoko ingoa. I'm the General Manager of the Inshore
Division of Moana New Zealand.
And to put that in context, Moana New Zealand is the largest
iwi-owned
fishing company in New Zealand.
We're a major quota owner across finfish, crayfish, pāua,
and we're the largest farmer of Pacific oysters
in New Zealand.
Our role is both of a commercial nature, but also of an intergenerational
nature,
grounded by the Maori Fishery Settlement and underpinned by a strong
commitment to Kaitiakitanga.
We operate
with a number of networks.
We don't own fishing vessel ourselves.
We have over 70 fishers, independent fishers who fish
for us,
pāua divers and crab fishermen as well.
So we use those relationships
regionally,
as well as
in places like Auckland and those sorts of things.
I think this gives us a long-term interest in ensuring fisheries
management is sustainable, practical, and workable.
Moana supports the overall intent of the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
We see this as an important step
in the modernizing of fisheries management systems,
improving its responsiveness, efficiency, and certainty.
We consider the bill to be a natural evolution of the quota
management system, reflecting advances in monitoring, reporting,
and data availability.
I think for us it improves clarity, which
we desperately need, and the systems enables more agile
data-driven decisions, making
legislative framework with how fisheries are managed in a
practical way today, which is very different
from even 20 years ago.
Our focus is on ensuring the detailed settings strike the right
balance between flexibility, transparency,
and
system integrity. So, listening to some of your other
presenters here today, I think those things are very important.
So, do you want me to go through
point by point? I assume you've had the submission already.
Yes.
I'm happy to answer any questions.
I guess
you've got about
seven and a half minutes left. Maybe if you could cover off a couple of the
major issues that you think are being addressed.
Yep.
Well, for us,
cameras
on vessels.
Moana New Zealand had cameras on vessels eight years before
the requirement was brought in. So,
we have always had the view of transparency but also collecting
information, otherwise you can't make good decisions
on what's happening out there. So,
in terms of privacy, we believe that
it's very important to maintain the privacy of our fishermen who are
out there working in their workplaces.
And
we believe that having an organization like
the ministry out there that's
that watchdog, if you like, for us,
we think that's more than sufficient.
You don't see cameras in other working places
either, so we don't see why that's necessary here.
MPI is more than sufficient in terms of monitoring
what we're doing
and holding us to account in that context.
The other one is carryovers.
We believe it's pretty important to have that flexibility, to have those
tools.
And
obviously it depends on what the request is for
in terms of asking the minister to make a decision on carryovers,
because it could be through weather
events, a fishery is not accessible to fishermen.
It could be through rāhui, things like that,
which must be respected.
And at the end of the day
it must also be backed up by science in terms
of if there's no impact
as a result of that carryover. So we think having those tools is
pretty important in terms of those sorts of decisions and
we believe that's what's lacking at the moment.
We don't have the tools that we need, as you heard.
It's a rapidly changing environment that we work in.
It's a rapidly changing resource that we work with.
So we need all the tools in the toolbox, so to speak, to be able to
make good decisions in real time,
versus the past where we've had to go through long processes
to actually make a decision.
And once that decision's made, often
the resource is already going down instead of going up and those
sorts of things, soWe believe the bill provides that
flexibility, provides that
tools to be able to make good decisions, fast decisions,
so that we can ensure that sustainability carries on for the
future.
Very good. All right. We've got a question from Suz, and then Grant.
Well, actually, I had questions about the carry forward and
also about the camera footage, and you've answered them really concisely.
But I do want to congratulate you on an exceptional submission.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Grant. Yeah.
Just the
cameras.
For me, it seems to be this fundamental lack of trust
between the
wider fishing community and
the commercial community. And they don't appear to even want to trust
the MPI officials with the
footage.
So would there be a halfway house whereby you could, say, have an independent
oversight, so that the footage stays private, but you've got,
say, an independent office of Parliament that just keeps an eye on to make sure
that MPI are actually utilizing and analyzing the
data correctly so it doesn't go public.
But then there's just that to give that extra confidence to the
wider public that the data is being analyzed properly.
Yeah, I think trust comes from working together-
Yeah
... and solving problems and
looking at solutions, right? So,
something like that could be considered.
Yeah. Definitely.
And just- May I? No, it's a different topic.
Oh, I'll go to Tean and then I'll come back. Tean.
Yeah. Kia ora. Kia ora. Tēnā pea mīhana mo ēnei whakamārama.
Thanks for your submission. And mine is, it really is a sup on what Grant
was saying as well.
Often when we
pitch for OIAs, the information that often comes back is
redacted. Some parts of it are redacted.
And so I'm wondering if
the public being able to access information, if there are redactions, like say,
for example, the identity of
workers on board to make sure that their privacy was protected,
and those types of things, whether that would
alleviate some of those concerns for you.
Or, and what Grant was saying, whether that could
also alleviate some of those concerns around access to
camera footage.
Well, kia ora.
There's already a number of,
I guess, tools that can be used in terms of using
your examples around crew and vessels and those sorts of things,
which are used by Maritime New Zealand and
if workers
have all their certificates and those sorts of things.
So those sorts of things are already there.
In terms of footage,
again,
whether it's a parliamentary person or MPI,
that should be more than sufficient to raise the
concerns. And if that goes further, then it goes further, right?
So I don't think there's anything more required in that context.
Grant. Yeah, I'm just curious. The carryover, how
big a problem has that potential of the carryover situation been?
Can you give us some sort of context around that?
Well, in
the finfish or the fish side of things, there's already a
10% carryover-
Mm-hmm
... annually.
And that's
because companies don't catch right on the decimal point
of quota.
Mm-hmm.
And there's generally a rounding up where companies look at
those that are under, those that are over.
Mm-hmm.
And it's kind of matched together.
So,
it doesn't happen very often that a request is made
to the minister,
for sure.
And instances in the past have primarily been in the crayfish
sector,
where for whatever reason they've been unable to harvest.
Cray three's a good example. They make a request to the
minister who looks at that. But again, it's not just done
in singularity. There's a consultation
process.
Different groups are involved. And that should
be the way it's done, right.
Thank you. And thank you. I've had the privilege to visit your
facility recently. It's very good.
Thank you.
Final question.
There was one submitter talking about bycatch and it not being logged.
Do you have any
comment around that?
Well, from Moana's perspective,
we have an exemplary
history of recording data,
filling out forms and these sorts of things.
So,
I'm not aware of any instances that involve not filling out
forms properly, bycatch, those sorts of things.
So you're saying it's all recorded?
From Moana New Zealand's perspective, yes.
Thank you very much.
Thanks for a really good submission.
Yeah. Thank you.
Kia ora.
And thank you for your time.
Kia ora Tean.
Right, we're now moving on to the Live Ocean Foundation in
partnership with Jono Ridler,
Swim for the Ocean Ultramarathon Swimmer, and it's
going to be via Zoom.
Ah,
morning
Can you hear us?
Yes, we've got you. Have you got us?
Yes, we have.
Yeah.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
You have 10 minutes,
so the time is yours.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you, committee members, for the opportunity to
speak today. My name is Blair Trew, co-founder of Live Ocean.
Live Ocean's vision is clear: a healthy ocean for a
healthy future.
And that healthy ocean is what is at stake when considering
this Fisheries Amendment Bill.
Live Ocean's position on this bill is that it should be
withdrawn. We align with the recommendations of the
Deep Sea Conservation Coalition, of which we are a member, on this
position.
Aotearoa, New Zealand is 93% ocean.
We are responsible for the fourth largest ocean space
in the world. Yet for a country surrounded by the Moana,
when it comes to ocean stewardship, we are not
leading. In fact, if it was sport, I would
say we don't even rank.
Now, I'm presenting today alongside Jono Ridler,
ultramarathon swimmer, ocean advocate, and the
legend behind Swim for the Ocean.
For those not familiar with Swim for the Ocean, Jono swam
1,367 kilometers over 90 days from
North Cape to Wellington
in just his togs. It is, in my view, one of the
greatest human endurance feats ever.
Jono.
Morena.
Thank you, Blair, for the introduction, and thank you committee members for today.
Swim for the Ocean gave a unique perspective on the scale
of the beauty and vulnerability of our ocean space.
And throughout the journey, we met with hundreds of coastal communities,
iwi fishers, divers, surfers,
and one thing became clear to us: New Zealanders care
deeply about ocean health, and they expect leadership
that reflects both science and long-term thinking.
So the focus of our written submission, which we take as read, centers
on two key concerns. I'll go through those.
Firstly, the further entrenchment of commercial bottom trawling
facilitated by this bill.
We're concerned that the bill further entrenches bottom trawling
while not protecting the habitats that these fisheries depend
on. The science is very clear. Many of these
environments take centuries to recover.
This is particularly relevant for seamounts.
This bill shifts fisheries management towards increasing
quota flexibility with less frequent reviews,
reduced independent oversight, and reduced constraints.
It prioritizes economic gain and bulk harvesting,
including bottom trawling, while reducing safeguards to
protect the environment.
This increases the pressure on at-risk species and vulnerable
habitats.
A sustainable future is dependent on fishers taking their catch in
more selective and sustainable ways.
This bill removes incentives for fishers to make this
change.
Secondly, the weakening of ecosystem and environmental
safeguards. The ocean is an interconnected system.
Fisheries management cannot be separated from habitat protection,
from climate resilience, biodiversity,
customary interests, recreation and tourism,
or the cultural relationship that New Zealanders have with the sea.
Yet this bill ignores this wider context.
It narrows the fisheries focus towards single species quota
management, while reducing the emphasis on accounting for
wider ecosystem impacts.
Decisions must be science-led. They must take a
precautionary approach in a rapidly warming and changing ocean.
And they must recognize that long-term fisheries sustainability
depends on long-term ecosystem health.
At a time of increasing pressure from climate change, biodiversity
loss, and habitat degradation,
we believe fisheries reform should strengthen
ecosystem protections, not weaken them.
Jono and I are
not here as fisheries experts. We are here representing
74,000 New Zealanders calling for a new approach when
it comes to ocean management.
Our submission today is not an argument against commercial fishing.
It is an argument that healthy fisheries depend on a
healthy ocean.
The essential issue before this committee is whether New Zealand is willing to
align with the best available science about ocean health
and impacts of destructive fishing practices.
If we want continued access to global markets, then New Zealand
needs to be recognized as a nation that fishes sustainably
and protects vulnerable marine ecosystems.
We can be leaders here.
In addition to pulling back from the most concerning aspects of the
proposed amendments,
this will require, in the spirit of the Swim for the
Ocean,
an end to issuing permits
of New Zealand boats bottom trawling on seamounts in South Pacific high
seas,
the full protection of seamounts in New Zealand waters, any
underwater feature rising more than 100 meters from the surrounding
areaThe science is clear.
Seamounts are some of the most vulnerable and ecologically
important ocean habitats.
And third, support the fishing industry to innovate and
transition away from bottom trawling entirely.
New Zealand cannot separate fisheries decisions from
wider
ocean protection and climate resilience.
Sustainable fisheries depend on healthy
ecosystems. They depend on it.
Live Ocean and Swim for the Ocean are about bringing people
around the ocean to challenge the status quo when it comes to how we
fish.
Our ambition is supported by 74,000 New Zealanders who
signed the petition to end bottom trawling, a destructive method that
drags weights across the sea floor, causing extensive and
long-lasting damage to the very ecosystems needed to
support thriving fisheries.
So in summary,
yes, our fisheries management needs improvement.
However, we urge fisheries reform grounded in
science, guided by precaution,
based on ecosystem management, and focused on a healthy
ocean for a healthy future. Nga mihi nui. Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much. We've got a question with Rachel
Boyack.
Yeah. Thank you, Chair. Hi, Blair and John. Nice to see you.
I'm keen to just expand a bit more on the comments you've made about
ecosystem management, because we've heard a few submissions on that theme
today.
What would you be wanting to see in the bill in order to
show that it was about more than just considering a particular
fish stock and the economic management of that, but actually how the
fish stock interacts with the wider ocean
environment and the biodiversity,
the health of the ocean? So can you expand on what you'd like to see in the bill?
Yeah. So when we talk about ecosystem-based
management, that is acknowledging that you can't
differentiate just
catching fish to looking after the sea floor to
any other part of the ocean. It is all interlinked,
and you need all of them to be healthy and thriving if you want to have a
sustainable fishery for the future.
So when we talk about ecosystem-based management, it's
having that longer term view and understanding
all parts of the ocean and acknowledging that.
So
we would want to see that in any sort of reform, that
longer term thinking of how do we make this thing
good for the long term? That's
from an environmental point of view, but also if you come back to the
economics of it, how do you actually sustain it for the long term?
Kia ora.
Grant, make it sharp. Yeah. Thanks. G'day, guys.
Just very quickly, so effectively what you're looking for is
that long-term approach and leadership from government to
ensure not only the abundant and healthy environment, but also
you acknowledge we want to also see
a thriving commercial sector so that we can all afford to buy fish at the
supermarket.
Yes. We've said from the outset
that we're not opposed to commercial fishing.
This is about
a world where commercial fishing can thrive, but the
ecosystem is put first and foremost, and if that
thrives, then everything else thrives around that. Mr.
Chair, I was aware that we had 20 minutes for this
session. Is that not correct?
Oh, so it is.
It is.
Everyone
else has been
10. Sorry, I missed that. Yeah. It's correct. Carry on.
Yeah.
So,
we've got a question here from Teanau.
Tena koe, tena koroua.
Thank you very much for your very clear submission, and let me
acknowledge the amazing work that you have both done.
I was in Wellington when John had gone on to shore as
well. It was incredibly inspirational, and I
know that that
advocacy landed very strongly with so many New Zealanders.
So I want to acknowledge that straight out the bat.
You talked about the protection of seamounts
as a first step that you would like to see in terms
of
marine protections and then also looking at the transition piece
away from
bottom trawling. And I was wondering if you had any more
ideas about what that transition could look like from your perspective in
terms of the conversations that you've been having with
different folks up and down the country and what that might or could look
like.
Sure.
Just on the first part of that, Teanau,
the
reason we've focused on seamounts to begin with are because these are some of the
most vulnerable and biodiverse
habitats there are on the planet,
and the damage that has been caused from bottom trawling on them is
very high, and also alongside that
commercial take is relatively low.
Of course, there is take on there, but the
numbers that we have seen have shown that that is actually quite low
if you talk about those seamounts being those
100-meterMountains above the seafloor.
So that's the first part of it, and that's why we focus the majority of
our efforts
in New Zealand waters and those seamounts that are bottom trawled around the South
Pacific.
Now, to the longer-term transition, you can probably
break that into a few different parts.
Of course, there's the inshore fisheries,
which is probably acknowledging the fishery that a lot of people that
connect with the ocean in Aotearoa, they see that
they're either out there recreationally,
another activity, or the commercial fishing
is seen in those areas.
Now, that's
happening at a shallower depth, in general,
than the deep sea fisheries. So
this would be,
in our view, the next step to
target this. But this needs to be
government led, and it needs to be
then worked in conjunction with industry as to which areas of
the inshore fishery can be...
It needs to be a just and a timely. We can't just
flip the switch overnight. We're very aware of that.
And then the second part of that transition would be the deep sea
fishery, which,
as many on
the committee would be aware, is a much more difficult proposition
because of the depths that the
fish are caught at. So that is our view
on that. I hope that answers the question.
Thank you.
We have a question with Rachel.
Thanks, Chair. I just want to come back to your comment that you
made around
stating that the bill further entrenches bottom trawling, because I think one of
the issues around the bill, the bill doesn't actually cover off
fishing methodology. It covers off how many fish you can
catch, where you can catch them, and looking at it in terms of
species by species. So
I'd just be really interested in where you can point to in the amendment
bill that's actually going to entrench bottom trawling, when the bill's
actually specifically focused on the number of fish you can catch.
Thanks, Rachel, for that question.
So our submission is more focused on
the overall direction of the bill as opposed to
clause by clause, but you have asked a specific question.
So the amendments in aggregate prioritize
short-term bulk harvesting over broader ecosystem
impacts.
They reduce penalties for overcatch
through deemed value
and weaken environmental safeguards, which impacts on
seamounts, as Blair has just discussed.
So we believe in our interpretation of this,
that there are specific sections that allow for that
and that permit that entrenchment of bottom trawling.
For example, the
deemed value under Clause 40 and
considering broader environmental factors under the bill.
So I'll just bring it back to our higher level point,
which is that we believe that this bill, as
it's put forward, does not consider the wider
ecosystem impacts, and that's why fundamentally we're opposed to it.
We now have a question from Suze Redmayne.
Hi, and thank you very much. Look, I'll be quick so everyone else can get a go.
But the noise was deafening from my
electorate in particular and amongst my colleagues regarding allowing
commercial fishers to
bring back their bycatch to shore.
And if you talk to the minister and other people that see the other side of the
argument, it comes off their quota.
Therefore, it was, I think, designed to change their
behavior because they would lose money by rather than disposing of that
bycatch at sea, they would have to bring it to shore.
And I just wondered, following all the thousands of
submissions you've received as well and feedback you've received, if
you had had any change of heart or thought in regard to
that part of the bill.
Yeah. Thanks, Suze.
Live Ocean did not take a formal view on this part
of the bill. But from a personal
point of view, just want to acknowledge that this is a
complex
part and a complex issue trying to be solved,
and I do see both sides of it. And
I think we could probably all agree how this
blew up. It really didn't get into the core of
what actually was trying to be solved here.
Fundamentally, it comes from bulk harvesting
and bycatch actually happening in the first place.
So what we're talking about here is changing methodology
and trying to reduce that, trying to be more targeted up front.
And if that were the case, then this issue
of bycatch and dumping of fish,
no one wants to see that, but that is happening currently,
then that would be solved in time if we can be
more targeted of how we fish.
Suze.
So I guess, so I'm saying that if there was an element of a punitive
measure of those fishers having to return the
bycatch to shore, then that might change
behavior. Are you prepared to take a position on that, whether you
think it should stay or go in terms of the bill?
Live Ocean, as I said, did not take and will not take a formal
position on this.
However, we are opposed to
dumping of fish.
So
yes,
personal
opinion here, if you could get to a place where fishers were penalised for
catching undersized fish and
they were de-incentivised, then you could see how
this could work. Whereas as it currently stood,
if there was a market created for small
fish, using snapper for example, then you could see
where the
argument were coming from both sides.
Thank you. Yeah, that's what I meant, the undersized.
Yeah.
Thank you very much. Thanks for clarifying that, I appreciate it.
We've got a question from Teanau.
Kia ora. Kia ora. We heard from a number of submitters
previously around concerns around
more powers being placed into the minister's hands.
And so the concerns were, well, actually, the point of ministers is
to be into governance, not into operations.
And so if you have ministers dabbling in operations, that could
cause issues around transparency and accountability.
So I was wondering if you had a view on that.
Hi, Teanau. Thank you for your question.
In terms of the written submission, we did not take a
formal position on that point.
But anything that reduces environmental safeguards
and does not look at the wider ecosystem impact is something that's of a concern
and that we've outlined under our submission.
So, I couldn't speak specifically to
the minister reach under the Fisheries Amendment
Bill.
But coming back to what we'd like to see,
which is
improved
management that leads to an ecosystem-based approach that allows
for all of those other factors,
not just the efficiency of the fishery to be considered.
Thank you. Are there any further questions?
No. Well, thank you very much, Blair and Jono.
We really appreciate your time.
And your submission will be considered
when we
consider the bill as a whole. So thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much.
Cheers all.
Right. Now we're moving on to Te Ohu
Kaimoana, and it's Kylie Greig.
Ah, yes, they're here in person, so that's great.
Welcome to the committee.
You have 10 minutes, and how you use the time's up to you.
So fire away.
Tena koutou katoa. Ko Brianna Boxall
ahau.
My name is Brianna. I am the Chief Executive at Te Ohu Kaimoana.
Alongside me is my colleague, Kylie Greig, manager of our
Oceans Fisheries team,
and Avalon Adams and Te Puea Dempsey, our senior analysts in our fisheries
team.
As you'll know, Te Ohu Kaimoana works on behalf of 58
mandated iwi organizations
and iwi aquaculture organizations who in turn represent iwi
throughout our country.
Our interest in the Fisheries Amendment Bill
arises from our responsibility to protect and advance the rights and
interests of iwi in fisheries and aquaculture.
We do this, of course, through our manner of our fishery settlement, Maori
Fisheries Act, and of course, Te
Tiriti o Waitangi. Collectively, these all recognize
and the unique relationship that Maori have with the
moana, which is underpinned by reciprocity to both
enjoy
the taonga and ensure the health of the moana for future generations.
Our submission reflects this understanding and feedback we've heard from
iwi throughout our country
and of course, our kāhui entities, like Moana New Zealand, who you
heard earlier this morning. It does not intend, of course, to conflict
with those responses which you would have already heard or read.
We take this submission as read. I will pass
it soon to Kylie, who will work her way through some key points,
and then we'll leave it open for questions.
If we do so though, I'd like to note it would have been ideal if we, of course,
received 20 minutes, but with the short 10 minutes, maybe now nine minutes that we
have, we'll work our way through it very quickly.
First, I will just open up by saying we'd like to acknowledge the
changes proposed in the bill, which we see would improve
elements of the fishery system. At the time the Maori
fishery settlement, the quota management system was supported by iwi
as a mechanism to sustainably manage commercial fisheries.
However, the system has required some updates,
and while we acknowledge the comments that these amendments do not go far
enough, they do take a step in the right direction towards
modernizing the fisheries
Rachel. I'll pass it over to Kylie now.
Kia ora. Our point one is around enabling a responsive system.
So the ability for the system to respond to changes as they occur is
critical, and the current system does not always enable this.
We support these proposals with a broadened scope to consider the full suite
and believe they should already be formalized, such as the recognition of
non-regulatory measures. These measures have been initiated by our
kāhui entity and industry for many years and are a
vital part of our fisheries management system.
They respond to signals from stocks in fast and flexible ways, which is
not always possible through the regulatory mechanisms.
You can refer to pages 36 to 42 of our
submission.
We also support the amendments which initiate multi-year catch
decisions. This includes the guardrails provided in sections
21C and 21E to reverse these. As we heard in
some of the kōrero on Thursday, decisions are currently made in relation to
the forthcoming fishing year, and this does not always align with natural
cycles, such as the example Doug from Sealord made
on pilchards and southern blue whiting.
Multi-year catch decisions enable phased or temporary
adjustments which are far more responsive to signals from stocks and enable
a longer-term perspective. We note that the way in which these amendments are
applied or not to freshwater species such as tuna
needs additional consideration, and we therefore refer to the submission
by Te Wai Māori Trust.
And you can also refer to paragraphs 25 to 30 of our
submission. We also support the amendments which will enable
fishers to apply for ACE carry forward of over 10% in
exceptional circumstances. Similar to other submitters, we
recognize that this is appropriate and important in particular scenarios
where the ability to fish has been impacted by unforeseen events, but
only where there isn't a concern around the sustainability of the stock as well.
We have comfort there is a criteria for what qualifies as
exceptional circumstances, and also that there would be
the requirement to both engage with quota holders, which includes iwi,
to consider any sustainability impacts.
You can refer to paragraphs 43 to 48 of our
submission. Our point two is on iwi
engagement. No matter the process, our expectation is for the
Crown to uphold its responsibility to engage with our mio.
This reduces the risk of making decisions remiss of localized context.
Feedback from our mio stated that it's not enough to simply engage with them,
but that their views and feedback must be reflected in decision-making as
well.
We support the amendments which enable the Minister to approve management
procedures,
and we recognize that these procedures rely heavily on localized conditions
and local fishing efforts to be effective.
Therefore, we expect the engagement with iwi would inform the procedures and their
implementation as well.
Paragraphs 31 to 34 of our submission details this.
Iwi engagement is also essential to fulfill the proposed changes in
section 13, which would enable the Minister to consider social, cultural,
economic factors within their decisions.
We support this holistic approach which balances sustainability with
use and believe these factors need to inform all decisions as
well.
Point three, which is enabling research to inform decisions.
We support amendments which introduce sections to manage low, medium, and
high stocks. These present an opportunity to further develop our
knowledge of these stocks and fill information gaps, with many stocks
not having had any total allowable catch changes in the past
20 years. While we've heard the concerns regarding there is enough
data to make decisions on particular stocks, we believe
continuing with current status quo, which is to do nothing, only contributes
to this issue. There is a lot to be learnt through utilization,
and we believe the changes to temporary adjustments and the guardrails
proposed would provide comfort in their flexibility
to make changes based on the stock signals.
I refer to paragraphs 20 to 24 of our submission.
Got two final points we'd just like to raise.
The first is that the reference to fisheries plans within the
proposed new section 11AAA.
While we support the intent of this amendment, we would like the wording in
relation to the fisheries plan to be reinstated so that the Minister would
be required to take into account that specific wording,
and you can refer to paragraphs 54 to 60 of our submission on that one as
well. Secondly, the 20-day timeframe for
judicial review introduced through section
313A. Most iwi we engaged with agreed with this was not a
reasonable timeframe,
and we can foresee that this would introduce other issues like placeholder
litigation occurring.
So we'll just open the floor for questions now as well.
And Rachel for the first question.
Thank you, Chair. I just wanted to clarify, you
just mentioned the pilchards example that Doug
Ballantyne raised last week. So were you just saying you agreed with his analysis?
Yeah.
Okay, great.
Just-
Just to clarify, thank you.
Susan.
Oh, you talked about the 20 days and you referred to placeholder
litigation. And you're not alone in your sentiments about this, by the way.
Yeah.
It
has been
widely echoed, but what do you mean by placeholder?
So log in when,
I guess it's kind of in the title, but essentially you're moving
the pressure for engagement from the back end to the front end.
So where people may not have the time to develop a robust
argument or even get mandate to participate in the discussion or
appeal what's being decided on. They may put a
placeholder in just so that they can participate while they gather the evidence.
Okay.
So that's our concern, yeah.
And do you think it could be likely to lead to litigation further down the road
because you've stopped that process?
Well, more litigation.
More litigation. Yeah, more litigation, sorry.
Potential for more litigation, but also just the expense of putting placeholder
litigation in while you're still developing your evidence for your
argument is a concern for us, and it's a concern for iwi.
Ka pai. Thank you.
Sup.
Just to sup to that, I note that you say that the 20 days is not
sufficient. What was sufficient in your
stakeholders' minds?
That we would need to work with you on with further.
There's no resounding answer yet, but we encourage
further engagement with us to work out what that looks like.
Mm. Yeah. Thank you.
Grant. Yeah, morning.
We've had quite a lot of feedback from people who are just concerned about the
overall health of the ocean and the marine environment.
Mm-hmm.
I'm just curious because this is obviously very focused on specific
parts of the commercial sector in particular and making it work better.
Do you have a view on what we could do
in this space from the fishing sector to actually
create a more abundant, healthy marine environment
to align with some of the concerns we're hearing?
Well, we believe that the bill actually enables
consideration of species and how they interact with each other as it stands
currently.
Mm-hmm.
And this doesn't threaten that at all.
So there are mechanisms within there that
considers the biodiversity and how they impact with each other.
I mean, kina barrens and crayfish and snapper and zanax
interactive, and there's management procedures currently, or
management plans being put in place by the ministry to help manage that.
So we think that the bill as it stands enables sustainability.
And just to leverage off that, just to add that the environmental principles within
the act don't change. So they're still in there.
Mm-hmm.
So there is still that foundation that exists within the fisheries
framework.
And yeah, this is just introducing some more tools to help
with a responsive system.
Yeah.
Ka pai. Thank you.
Do you feel that the Act should been able to deliver
that well enough to date?
There's always room for improvement within the act-
Yeah
... and within the framework, and we believe that this is a step in the right
direction. So, we'd like to see further change happen
overall.
Mm-hmm.
But we note that there hasn't been significant change to the act in a long time.
There has been a need to modernize it.
There's been a lot of changes within industry itself.
Mm-hmm.
So we've heard about changes to electronic reporting, which is now
huge. There's a lot of data that's available. We've got cameras for transparency.
The way that we operate now is very different to how we operated back in '86 when
the QMS was introduced. So this is a step in the right direction-
Mm-hmm
... and we support that and encourage that.
We overall just want a good system that supports an abundant
fishery for everyone.
Thank you. Kia ora. Thank you very much.
We're over time, but I really appreciate your submission.
It was a very good one.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thanks for your time today.
Have a good day.
Right. Now we have Greenpeace,
and I believe Ellie Hooper.
Kia ora.
Oh, you're online. Cheers. There you are. Hi, Ellie. Gidday, Ellie.
Hi.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
You have 10 minutes. How you use that, it's up to you.
So fire away.
Awesome. Kia ora koutou.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak on the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
I want to start by putting this bill in the wider kind of context that
it arrives in, which is that often under this
government, we hear a lot about the need to find balance
and to reach equilibrium between industry profits and the
protection of nature.
And we are increasingly told, especially recently,
that the two are not mutually exclusive and that we can have both thriving
ecosystems, and we can build profit for private
companies.
But I would like to ask the select committee if they think that New Zealand's
oceans are currently in balance, and that's given the fact that less than
1% of New Zealand waters are protected, that we have the highest
proportion of threatened native species anywhere in the world,
that 90% of our seabirds are threatened with extinction, and that key
fish stocks have collapsed. And the select committee has heard lots of examples
of some of those collapses this morning.
My argument is that the bill is not entering a political or a natural ecosystem
that is currently in balance, but one that's already drastically
off-kilter, and one where destructive, extractive industry
has been prioritized to date to the detriment of Aotearoa's marine
environment.
You've heard lots of evidence about this already. I think it's extremely clear.
But this bill, if it was passed, would take ocean policy in this country
further in that wrong direction, prioritizing extraction and
removing the very few environmental checks and balances that exist in the
Fisheries Act to stop further decline.
It would cement New Zealand's position as a nation which, with a larger ocean
estate than most countries, cares the most about how much can be taken
out of it.
This is all in the context, as Jono Ridler has spoken to already, that New
Zealanders have told this government and previous governments that they
want a ban on bottom trawling. None of you will have missed that message over the
last few months. Over 100,000 people have signed petitions.
Jono Ridler swam the length of the North Island.
And we know that people from across the political spectrum want this.
It's not just a green issue. People who vote for all different types of parties
want bottom trawling banned.
So the position, in summary, of Greenpeace Aotearoa is that this bill is rotten,
and it must be rejected in its entirety.
There is not a version of this bill that can pass because it was written with the
wrong purpose in mind.
I will speak to a few of our key concerns around the bill.
I wasn't going to go into the detail of the clauses, forgive me.
But
the first is obviously the removal of the environmental safeguards, which perhaps
needs no explanation.
The idea that the minister would be able to disregard the environmental principles
currently in the act, as if fishing happens in a vacuum and
doesn't have an impact on other species or habitats, is kind of nonsensical to
us.The bill also, as many have said this
morning, shifts New Zealand fisheries further in the direction of single
stock management when we know that ecosystem-based management
is what we should move towards, and generally reflects the way that
ocean ecosystems work. You can't take a lot of one thing
out and expect it to not have an impact on other associated species.
We do have an issue with catch limits being set for five years without
review. We just think it creates more risk around fish populations, and it's
not as if we've managed all of them very well so far.
So actually, we kind of need to be a bit more precautionary in this
sense. We equally object to the restriction of
judicial review time frames, because it would stop the
ability of a lot of groups to challenge decision-making they don't agree
with. And lastly, I think,
well, my two last points really are that we do believe that this
bill incentivizes unselective fishing.
And I know that you had some questions for previous panelists.
Lowering the penalty for catching
over the amount or the wrong type of species we think is the
wrong way around. We really should be incentivizing more selective fishing,
not kind of reducing penalties that kind of could do that.
On cameras on boats, it will come as no surprise that Greenpeace
opposes the idea of exempting cameras on boats footage from the OIA.
We note the issues with privacy from the industry, but there is surely a
way that we can rectify this with blurring all the releases of segments of footage.
This industry does have a large impact on the ocean environment,
and locking up that footage from public view is not going to rebuild
trust in the commercial sector's activities.
We also note from our written submission that having a fine
that could potentially be five times higher for somebody
releasing evidence of environmental
damage versus somebody who actually did that
damage in the first place, we think is pretty egregious.
The bill could've been an opportunity to tackle some of the very real issues that
we have in New Zealand around ocean and fisheries, and I think it's a real
shame that that opportunity has been wasted.
As I set out in the start of this submission, there's no version of this amendment
bill, in our view, that can be accepted.
And Greenpeace Aotearoa is calling for it to be rejected in its entirety.
We believe that we should be starting a transition away from bottom trawling,
and we should be helping do that with legislation.
And we would support
the Live Ocean call, which is that seamounts and features must be
protected without delay,
and a real just transition started away from the bottom trawling
method to protect the ocean.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak.
Thank you, Ellie. We're going first to Teanau.
Teanau. Ellie, thank you very much for your very clear and very strong
submission. I really appreciate the detail that you went through.
We did hear earlier around this bit
around being able to transition
bottom trawling, and I know that you touched on that as well.
But you talked about
selective fishing methods, and I wonder if you could talk a
little bit more about what that could look like.
Yeah, this comes up quite a lot. I think that anything you could argue would
be more selective than bottom trawling, right?
It's such a catch-all method, and because
it's got that impact on the sea floor as well, it's essentially
a double whammy for the environment.
So, all fishing methods come with an
impact, and lots of people in this room will know that.
But lining anything is more selective than trawling with
huge nets that also drag through the benthic environment.
Thank you. Now,
Grant.
Yeah. Ellie,
good to see you again.
Just a question around the cameras.
You think that the
footage should be OIA-able. Well, given that it's a workplace,
I'm sure many workplaces wouldn't appreciate
what goes on there every day be made
publicly available. Do you think there'll be a halfway
house whereby that we didn't have it
available to the public, but we had an independent office of Parliament would
actually audit to make sure that MPI were actually
utilizing the data correctly in that space,
as opposed to just make it carte blanche open to the world to see?
Thanks, Grant. Yeah, I
know you've raised this point before.
I think
the difference is that we're not talking about having a live stream being beamed
through to the public from a fishing boat, right?
You would still have to go through a process of requesting the available
information. But I do think it's important that journalists and the
public and interested parties are allowed to request that
segment of footage of that evidence of the environmental
damage. So,
I'd have to look at your proposal in more detail, but I think that we would really
like to maintain that level of transparency where people could request it if
they wished.
Thanks a lot. Sup, Suz.
Thank you, Ellie. Do you acknowledge that the Director General
of MPI is still going to have access to that footage and be able to distribute
it to certain agencies where it sees fit, like through a court order
or whatever? So, there's plenty of footage that the police may have
that's not open to OIA, and I'm
just wondering if the protections that are outlined in this bill
cover off more or less everything that you discuss, but there's actually
not a need for the members of the public to see it in terms
of privacy.
I don't think so, no. And again, I would really push back that I
think nobody is asking to see the particular individual's
face on what is doing whatever. But I think the public and
other groups should be able to request segments of footage
that show the impact that fishings have on the ocean.
So no, I don't think that covers it all.
I think it should still be within the OIA.
Teanau.
Ellie actually just covered that off.
That was my question around ways that you can be
able to access information and apply for information via
OIA, but still find a way to protect the privacy of workers in
particular.
And there is technology out there where you can pixelate things out and so on and
so forth. So I just wanted that view.
But
so if you want to expand on that, Ellie, that'd be great, but I think you might
have just covered it.
All right. Any further questions? No. That's all.
Right.
We're going to-
Thanks, Ellie
Thanks, Ellie. So thanks very much for your time today, Ellie.
No, thanks.
We're going to move on to the next submitter, but before we start,
you're going to have to remove
any political
banners
from your
submission
from your background,
Kayla.
Sorry about that.
It's
against standing orders.
All right.
Welcome to the select committee. You have 10 minutes.
The time is yours.
Tena koutou katoa, chairs and members of the committee.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to speak to our submission on the Fisheries
Amendment Bill on behalf of The Opportunity Party.
My name is Kayla Kingdon-Bebb, and I'm joined today by fellow Opportunity
candidates, Jodie Kunst and Derek Paul.
The Opportunity Party was founded on the idea that New Zealand can do better
when we take a long-term, evidence-based approach to public policy.
Our platform is grounded in intergenerational wellbeing,
ensuring that the decisions we make today strengthen rather
than diminish the environmental, economic, and social inheritance we leave to
future New Zealanders.
That philosophy sits at the center of our Healthy Oceans policy.
Opportunity believes that New Zealand should aim to become a world
leader in sustainable high-value fisheries and marine
regeneration. Our Healthy Oceans policy is built around four core
ideas: restoring fish abundance, protecting marine
biodiversity, phasing out destructive fishing practices, and
building a high-value blue economy that creates
long-term prosperity whilst also operating within
ecological limits.
We support protecting 30% of New Zealand's ocean territory,
strengthening ecosystem-based fisheries management, expanding
transparency, and monitoring and rebuilding fish stocks to
genuinely abundant levels.
Underlying all of this is a really simple principle.
Our fisheries are a public resource held in trust for
current and future generations, not simply an extractive
industry to be managed for short-term commercial convenience.
It is from that perspective that we oppose this bill.
Rather than strengthening resilience, transparency, and ecosystem-based
management, it weakens environmental safeguards, reduces
public oversight, and shifts more risk onto already stressed marine
ecosystems. Our core recommendation is that the committee
should not proceed with the bill in its current form.
Now, I'm here also with colleagues Jodie Kunst and
Derek Paul. Jodie, are you on the call now?
I think she's put a message in the chat
as seeking to join.
Yep.
Tuning up shortly.
Okay.
Technical issues here.
It seems that both of my colleagues cannot get access.
There we are.
Here we are. Over to you, Jodie.
All right, fantastic.
Thank you, and apologies for the delay.
The first point we wanted to emphasize is that while intended to
modernize, this bill reflects a rather outdated philosophy of fisheries
management and effectively asks New Zealand to accept that fisheries should
continue to be managed primarily around extraction
efficiency. And we reject that premise, that
healthy fisheries only exist within healthy ecosystems and supported by
healthy communities. It's an integrated network that underpins our
culture, recreation, livelihoods, and
identity as a South Pacific island nation.
And that sentiment is strong here in New Zealand, which is why this bill has evoked
the response that it has. And if we look globally, we're seeing that the
evidence and investment flows are focusing on regenerative management and
climate resilient value chains rather than simply expanding wild
capture capacity.
The overall direction of travel is towards a blue economy that's carbon aware,
nature positive, and integrated with wider industrial and
community strategies. And we see none of that in this bill.
Even more so, the bill is threatening to weaken the precautionary approach
precisely at the moment that climate change, ocean warming,
biodiversity decline, and cumulative environmental pressures mean
we should be strengthening it,
particularly when the natural resource buffer could be our
saving grace in the geopolitical and trade tensions we
face.So Opportunity supports a genuinely
ecosystem-based approach to fisheries management with
economically driven incentives for rebuilding fish abundance,
protecting habitat and spawning grounds, reducing bycatch,
and managing fisheries as part of wider ecosystems rather
than isolated commercial units. And again, we're not seeing that
in this bill.
New Zealand markets itself internationally as leading,
sustainable, and premium,
and that brand depends on credibility.
And credibility requires us to manage fisheries according to both ecological
and economic reality, not political expediency.
On that note, I just want to speak briefly to the process that has informed
the development of this bill,
as that from our perspective is one of the most concerning points to raise with
this committee.
This committee knows that good environmental lawmaking requires
transparency, robust evidence,
meaningful consultation, and public trust.
And in this case, we do not believe those standards have been met.
As you know, approximately 25,000 New Zealanders submitted
against the original proposals in this bill during the consultation phase.
To us, that clearly should have signaled the need for a more collaborative
and evidence-based approach.
Instead, the
legislation that has been introduced contains the proposals in substantially the
same form.
The controversy, particularly around the minimum size provisions,
further exposed weaknesses in policy development and cabinet process.
The government's subsequent retreat on those provisions is welcome, but in
some ways it is also alarming.
If the ministers from Act and National knew that these proposals
would be controversial, allowed them through Cabinet and into the
House anyway, and are now actively distancing themselves from
them, frankly, that is dishonest.
Or, if those ministers and their parties truly did not realise
the substance of what Cabinet agreed upon with respect to this bill,
that suggests a terrible failing in governance.
We are also concerned by the compressed submission timeframe.
Given the complexity of this bill, a short submission timeframe is simply
insufficient. It strongly suggests that the government doesn't actually care
what the public thinks.
When public participation is compressed, democratic
legitimacy suffers, and with a shared public resource like fisheries,
legitimacy matters.
Thanks, Kayla.
Regarding that transparency, there's two operational
aspects of the bill that we want to highlight specifically,
the treatment of undersized fish and transparency around onboard
cameras.
Firstly, the bill's approach to undersized fish
risks creating incentives that normalize juvenile catch.
Opportunity Party's position is straightforward.
All fish caught should be counted and landed, but
undersized fish should not be commercially sellable.
If fishers can profit from juvenile catch, the incentive to fish
selectively is weakened.
By contrast, requiring fishers to land and report undersized fish
while prohibiting sale creates accountability and improves
data quality.
Secondly, we're deeply concerned by provisions restricting access
to camera footage and introducing severe penalties for sharing it.
The reality is that this bill will enforce a fine five times higher for
releasing the footage than the fine for the infringement itself.
Public confidence in fisheries management depends on transparency.
Cameras were introduced to strengthen this accountability.
Excluding footage from the OIA and threatening substantial fines
for disclosing it
moves us towards secrecy rather than trust.
The Opportunity Party supports retaining OIA
coverage,
independent review of footage, regular publication of
compliance data,
and explicit whistleblower protections.
Transparency should be treated as a strength of the system,
not a threat to it.
We believe New Zealand has the capability to become a global leader
in high-value sustainable fisheries and marine generation.
But that future is not going to be built by loosening protections or lowering
scrutiny. It will be built through
transparency, ecosystem-based management science,
strong treaty partnerships, stakeholder
collaboration, and long-term stewardship.
This is not a bill that modernises fisheries management, and it's not a
bill that unites those shared interests around a shared
resource. So it's not a bill that we feel should be supported.
Tena koutou katoa.
Thank you for the opportunity to share, and we welcome any of your questions.
Any questions?
No, doesn't seem to be. Thank you for your time today.
Kia ora. Great to see you.
Great.
Cheerio. Thank you.
Thanks.
Right, our next submitter is the Power Industry Council.
Ah, here we go.
And I believe we've got Tom McCowan and Nikki
Gibbs.
Ah, there we are.
Welcome.
Kia ora.
You have-
Hi
... 10 minutes,
and the time is yours.
Kia ora koutou. I'm Dr Tom McCowan.
I'm the science and policy advisor with the Power Industry Council.
This is my colleague, Nikki Gibbs, from Fathom
Consulting.We appreciate that everyone here is at the end of a
very long run of take on lots of different considerations with regards to this
bill. So we're really appreciative of the opportunity to speak
today.
The Pāua Industry Council represents the interests of all the participants in the
commercial pāua industry, all the way from quota owners,
vessel operators, through to divers and processors.
With the ultimate goal of sustainably managed pāua fisheries.
We have a strong interest in ensuring that our legislation continues to provide
for the sustainable utilization of pāua fisheries and to support
innovative management frameworks.
So pāua's obviously a highly valued taonga species.
It's an important customary recreational species and it also contributes to New
Zealand's export earnings.
Commercially,
fishing happens out of small inshore vessels,
usually two to four free divers, and they get the pāua by hand.
New Zealand has one of the largest operational abalone fisheries in the world,
which internationally have histories of poor management and decline, so it's
very important for us that we have optimized management.
Commercially, most of the fisheries management happens at the ground level
through regional management bodies.
Each of the main pāua quota management areas
operates under a ministerially approved
Section 11 fisheries plan, which detail the management objectives and
strategies for those fisheries, and these include details around
industry management tools referred to in the bill as
non-regulatory measures.
Some examples of these
voluntary industry measures are minimum harvest size, where we harvest sizes
larger than the minimum legal size to better protect the
spawning biomass. Catch spreading, where catch is apportioned to
sub-areas within the QMA to avoid localized harvest.
And also shelving, where quota owners relinquish a proportion of their
ace and don't catch as much the following year when there's concerns about
the status of the fishery.
So the overarching objective for industry management through these plans and
measures is to achieve finer scale management that is biologically appropriate for
pāua in a way that maximizes the use of data in an
agile and responsive manner, allowing for environmental change as
well as natural changes of population productivity.
So we're taking our written submission as read today.
Within that, there were three key points of emphasis.
Those in relation to fisheries plans and non-regulatory measures we won't be
talking about today, but we'd just like to provide some more context
for our support for a legislative framework for management
procedures.
So you will have heard from several groups what management procedures are this
week, so I won't go too much into it.
But basically, it's a system for adjusting catch levels annually so that less is
taken when stocks are declining and more can be taken when productivity is high.
They're based on preset rules driven by
indicators from fisheries data.
They allow adjustments to be made in a responsive and agile manner, and it's a
science-driven process which removes the potential for opinion and
biases in decision-making.
So the current model in which high-level management decisions are made around pāua
fisheries operates--
revolves around periodic stock assessment and management review, which are usually
on about a five-yearly basis, often longer for pāua fisheries.
However, we're aware that changes in fisheries dynamics that need management
attention happen across much shorter time frames than this.
A common concern with the current framework, as you will have heard from other
submitters over the last couple of weeks, is that it lacks the
agility to respond to rapidly changing environmental
stresses. And this is exactly what management procedures can help to
facilitate.
Pāua populations are particularly susceptible to changes in ocean temperature,
marine heatwaves, and sedimentation.
And we're seeing these impacts happen in real time in some of our fisheries.
For example, in Pāua 7, Marlborough,
rapidly changing environmental stresses are having severe impacts on
pāua fishery productivity that the current management
framework simply can't keep up with.
We've been developing sophisticated management procedures for pāua fisheries that
rely on two indicators. That being catch per unit effort data and
spawning potential ratio, which is an index of reproductive
potential of the population that we derive from our commercial
catch sampling program.
So relying on two sources of data as indicators increases the
robustness of our system. So one signal on its own is not enough
to trigger a catch adjustment. There's also inbuilt precaution
where signals must be positive for two years in a row before there'd be an
increase, but will decrease if there's negative signals just for one year.
The procedures have undergone extensive testing and shellfish working group
scrutiny, including by independent reviewers.
We've been trialing management procedures to inform catch settings in
our southern quota management area, so Otago, Stewart Island, Fiordland.
So they've been field tested and we're confident that they do what they should do
in pāua.
The lack of current formal recognition of management procedures within the
Act means that the minister still must consult annually on TAC changes,
negating many of the potential benefits of using management procedures.
Two final points before I wrap up is that amending the Act
to explicitly provide for management procedures brings New Zealand in line with
international best practice, including being a requirement of the Marine
Stewardship Council certification for sustainable fisheries.
And finally, we believe that management procedures enhance
consultation. So as I mentioned before, under the current model,
management settings come up for review every five years,
or often longer. But with management procedure, this would have to happen every
five years or earlier if neededAnd currently
consultation only occurs around the TAC and its allocation.
But with management procedures, consultation happens across a range of criteria,
including what the stock biomass targets might be, the period that you
want to achieve those within, and the procedure that should
be used to achieve their objective.
So consultation is on the process for deciding what catches should be,
not
an arbitrary TAC
based on
the stock assessment output.
So I'll leave it there and happy to take any questions.
Thank you. There's a few questions lined up.
Heaps of questions, but I'll just do one.
Rachel.
The last question I heard from Rock Lobster about carryover.
Do you have some examples of where that could have also been helpful for
Paua? I guess, with the
international markets during COVID.
Yeah.
So the COVID example is a really good one.
During COVID, it would've been really handy for the Paua industry to have had the
ability to carry forward a proportion of ace into the next
fishing year because the Chinese market was closed, and that's the primary export
market.
Yeah.
Another example of when it might be useful
is a bit of a theoretical example. But say if there was a
commercial Paua fishery on the south coast of Wellington at the moment,
there's raw sewage being pumped into the sea.
No one is out there collecting Paua.
Yeah.
It's not the fault of the Paua fishers.
The Paua are still there, they're thriving.
But
if there was a commercial Paua fishery there, they wouldn't be able to catch it.
So it would make sense to, those fish will still be there next year.
Why not be able to take a proportion of that next year?
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Grant. Yeah.
Good to see you, Tom.
The
biomass target, what
do you guys work towards and why do you pick that
target?
So currently we work at about 40%
And that compares to
most of them around about 20, aren't they?
That's the minimum floor for other fishery.
Well, that's the soft limit-
Yeah
... at which a management consultation has to occur.
So-
So why have you picked out 40?
Well, that's just what we've always operated around in Paua, and I guess
speaking of
biomass targets,
this is one of the key things that a management procedure sort of-
Yeah
... aims towards.
Mm-hmm.
And so rather than deciding
through consultation up to stock assessment what the catch should be,
you're actually deciding where you want to end up.
Mm.
So it's
about a process and how you get there rather than just what the catch should be
based on
an output.
Yeah. Very good. Thank you. So a number of groups
have criticized the catch settings not
including
ecosystem considerations. Do you have any
comment around that?
Well,
we haven't dealt with it in a huge amount of detail in our submission.
I guess generally,
I think that the changes that the bill makes around the role of the TAC are really
codifying the way that the act currently works, but they're making it more
explicit, which is you've got to choose the right tool for the right job.
So if you're dealing primarily with an abundance issue at a quota
management area level, then you're gonna
use your TAC adjustment to deal with that problem.
But if you're dealing with some other environmental effect of fishing, you should
use a different sustainability measure, like
a control on a fishing method or an area closure or a seasonal
closure or something like that.
And I think these changes are really just saying, yeah, if you're dealing with
abundance,
use the TAC,
and environmental issues are only relevant to that decision to the
extent that they're relevant to the abundance issue.
So it's not completely excluding ecosystem
and environmental issues from the TAC decision.
It's saying
they're only relevant to the extent that they're
useful for the purpose of what the TAC is trying to achieve.
So
there is some consideration given, is what you're saying?
Yes. It's not a complete ignore the environmental principles
of the act when you're setting the TAC.
It's
take them into account, but only to the extent that they're relevant
to that particular
decision.
Yes.
Yeah.
Thank you very much. We've come to time.
I appreciate-
Thank you. It was a great one
... your inputs today. Thank you for your submission.
Well done, Apple.
Thank you.
Right.
Next we have the Solander group, and I
think we have Paul Hoplett
as a submitter.
This mine?
No,
when you leave, I'll go. When you-
That's all right
... either you leave or I leave. We ask to leave or you go.
So...
All right.
Solander.
Do we have them online or in person or?
Yep, here he is. Oh.
Ah.
There we go. Morning, Paul.
Morning.
I'm just looking at that lovely Nelson view.
Yeah.
It's outside my house, actually. Yeah.
Welcome to the committee. You have 10 minutes.
How you use the time's up to you. Away you go.
Yes. Well, thank you, committee, for allowing us to speak.
I've got Rachel Taylor here with me.
She's a senior manager in the Solander group and
very much a participant in this
submission and our thinking around...
quota management and the amendments to the Fisheries Act.
So it's appropriate she's here with me.
I'll take our submission as read, but I'll
just give a little bit of background about us and then talk
briefly about some of the things, points we've made in our
submission and support of
Seafood New Zealand.
Our history, we're a second-generation fishing family, and
our
background in fishing started in the 1970s when my
father was the founding CEO of Sealord.
And
he commenced Solander in the early 1980s, which
sort of coincided with some of the
significant changes in fisheries management in New Zealand, of
course, with the quota management system being introduced in
1986, and then followed up by the
Fisheries Act of 1996, which
is
of course what we're discussing
today. And I'd like to make the point to the
committee that
I hear a lot of noise with some of the other submitters and
a lot of them wanting to
talk off subject really, because what we're dealing with is effectively
an update to a piece of legislation that has
served New Zealand incredibly well for the better part
of 30 years. And really, we're just
talking about some relatively minor
updates and modernizations of a
robust piece of legislation that's put New Zealand
in a
excellent position to go forward for another 30
years. And it's appropriate that of course from time to
time this type of legislation
is amended to take account for technology and
changes with time.
So,
this legislation or this update of
existing legislation is not here to change the world.
It's here to refine and improve an excellent piece of
legislation that's stood the test of time.
For us, that's extremely important that we have the
certainty of time and the certainty of
government. That's the one thing that business asks of government,
and through that certainty, we're able to make
significant investments in the future of New Zealand
and our participation in our own easy and
harnessing the resources that we're fortunate to
have essentially to ourselves within the New Zealand easy.
And that is why we have made arguably the single
largest investment in the New Zealand
wild capture fishery in recent
times with our new vessel Takapoto, which is
now
sailing across the Atlantic Ocean towards New Zealand and will begin
operation here in July of
2026.
So again, I just want to confirm our support to
this legislation and
the Seafood New Zealand submission.
Just quickly then just to address some of the key
points of our submission. We support the proposed power of the minister
to make TAC decisions over multiple years.
We support excluding camera footage from the OIA.
We oppose the imposition of the 20
day time limit on the judicial review proceedings
in relation to discussions under the Fisheries Act.
We oppose the introduction of alternative deemed values for
some bycatch species
caught by both inshore and deepwater vessels.
And we strongly support the provision
for fish to be returned to the sea subject to
visual monitoring by cameras.
So,
that's pretty much a summary of our position and our
support for this update to the
longstanding New Zealand Fisheries
Act of 1996. And I'll just
leave it there and invite questions from here.
I think we've got a question from Suz Redmayne, then from
Rachel, then me and Grant.
I'm just wondering if this is a question now or sort of a statement, but thank you
for your-
... the ACE, accessing the ACE,
the bycatch.
Sorry, the lower deemed value rates. That's what I'm trying to talk about.
And you're saying that the proposed changes at this stage would fail to address
the underlying problems. And
although you do acknowledge, I note that it would be good for your business, which
is commendable. If you could just talk about
how you think that should be addressed rather than
through the-
Well, through the core mechanism that the quota management system already
provides is the setting of TACCs, and this
update to the existing legislation provides the minister with
some more flexibility to better allow for that.
For example,
ski or southern kingfish is a species that
huge amounts of deemed values have been
inflicted on the deepwater industry, including us in the last couple of years,
but for really no sustainable reason at all.
And
that could have been avoided byMore
proactive amendments to the
TAC of that species. So we don't support
tinkering around the edges. We're trying to support the existing mechanism.
It's just that the existing mechanism of changing the
total allowable catches is what
needs the improvement, not tinkering around the edges for
individual gains to individual companies and creating a
controversy along the way.
Thank you. Rachael.
Thank you. Nice to see you both.
We've heard from different reps from industry, some who
support the alternative deemed values changes and some that
don't. Can you just elaborate on why you don't, just so we can get a good
understanding of the different points of view within industry?
I'll just make sure I understand your question there, Rachael.
So we're talking deemed values and the-
Alternative deemed values
... yeah. Well, the
proposal as I understand it,
supported by some in the
industry, is really just using a financial
mechanism to
mitigate catch by deep water vessels,
certain bycatch by deep water vessels.
Whereas if the actual TAC
itself is at a sufficient level, that shouldn't be an issue.
You've already got that mechanism there within the existing management
regime.
Mm.
So we just don't support
what I would call tinkering around the edges.
Yeah.
Okay. No, thank you.
Thank you.
Paul.
Just talking about monitored returns.
There was a lot of discussion from various submitters around
making
bycatch and undersize compulsorily
land.
And by doing that, the argument is, is that
the fishing industry would then
move faster to employ methods
that avoid undersize and
bycatch. Do you have any comment around that?
Sure.
We're here to maximize
the fish that we have to catch through the quota
management system. That's obviously limited through the
annual catch entitlement, and each and every species is highly
valued under that system, and
we want to maximize the economic value of them.
And so, for example,
take hoki.
Traditionally the head is removed from hoki, whether you're a fillet vessel or
HNG vessel, and discarded over the side.
That's always been the case. Well, in recent years,
the value of that head has become such that it makes
sense to
pack it, freeze it, or stick it in a plastic bag, stick it in a carton,
freeze it, put it in the fish hold, take it off the vessel,
store it in the cold storage and sell it to somebody.
But there's a value at which that becomes economic.
And it's not
nothing. It's got to be something, if that makes sense.
So
there's a classic example of where
we are making inroads into
dealing with everything we catch, every part of the
fish and everybody in the New Zealand industry's
professional fishermen are committed towards doing that.
So I
really don't see the confusion. I think there's a lot of
misunderstanding of the basic economics and
you've got to remember that those economics are
challenging right now, and
energy use obviously is a significant impact on the
industry, and freezing things on factory tours, where the
vast majority of our fish is caught, requires energy.
And so the cost per unit of production of producing a
frozen piece of fish that could be resold has
recently, unfortunately, significantly increased.
So we need to be very careful about doing things in Wellington that would
upset what is already a fragile situation
economically.
Thank you. Look, we've run out of time,
so thank you very much for your submission. It was very good.
And we'll move on.
Okay. Thank you, John.
Thanks.
Thank you very much.
So now we have Animal Justice Party represented by
Danette
Wiereta. Ah, there she is.
Kia ora.
Good morning, Danette.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee. You have 10 minutes.
The time is yours.
Thank you, and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
So yes, I'm Danette Wiereta, speaking on behalf of the Animal Justice
Party. So I'll just add a couple of key points
from our written submission.
So firstly, the Animal Justice Party opposes the exploitation of
marine animals. Fish are sentient beings, not
commodities, not quota units, and not simply
economic outputs. But even putting aside our
position for a moment, this bill fails on
its own stated goals of sustainability, responsible
management, and maintaining public confidence in the system.
But honestly, when reading this bill, it feels like we are
arguing over whether we should be bad or really
bad, because if we take a step back and look at the
actual crisis facing our oceans, the conversation we would
be having is quite different.So globally,
marine ecosystems are under enormous pressure.
Fish populations are declining, sea beds are being destroyed,
oceans have warmed, and countless marine animals are killed by
bycatch every year.
Bottom trawling alone destroys fragile seabed
habitats and can take decades to recover, if ever.
So in the middle of this ocean crisis, why are we debating legislation
that weakens oversight, reduces transparency, increases
ministerial direction, and entrenches destructive fishing practices?
Why are we making accountability harder instead of stronger?
Now, we do understand the arguments that have been made in support of this
bill. We understand the desire for efficiency,
flexibility, operational certainty, and reducing
unnecessary bureaucracy. These are reasonable goals,
but the proposed solutions will not work.
They come at a cost, and that cost is simply too high.
The cost is reduced transparency and accountability, which
leads to oversight, which results in weaker oversight,
which results in greater environmental risk, and
continued harm to marine animals and ecosystems
under that already immense pressure.
So in the middle of this ocean crisis, New Zealand should not be
pulling these levers with these different consequences.
We should be asking: How can we do better?
Better protection, enforcement, transparency, most
importantly, better outcomes for marine life.
Because modernization should mean progress, definitely
not making exploitation more efficient.
So I'll just note that fish are the most exploited animals on the
planet.
Billions are killed every year through different methods,
often involving prolonged suffering, suffocation, crushing,
decompression injuries, being cut open while conscious, or
slowly dying in nets. And science has moved well
beyond the outdated idea that fish do not feel pain.
So there is significant scientific evidence that
fish are sentient beings capable of experiencing
pain, fear, stress, and suffering.
Fish have reception
so that they can feel pain,
pain receptors. They change behavior after injury.
They learn to avoid painful experiences, and they are highly
adaptive, intelligent, and socially complex.
So they can learn, they can remember, they can navigate
thousands of kilometers, they can recognize individuals and
change their behavior based on experience.
And some even show cooperative and problem-solving behaviors that
rival other well-known intelligent
species. So the reason why I say all of this is because
despite all the discussion in this bill about management
systems and operational flexibility, there is absolutely nothing in
here that meaningfully
improves the outcomes for the animals at the center of this industry.
Now, on transparency, we strongly oppose the
proposed restrictions around camera footage and OIA
access.
Frankly, I do not think that fish mind if cameras are
operating.
And for all those working, while many New Zealanders work in
workplaces with cameras, monitoring systems, audits, and reporting
requirements, and we accept transparency in countless
industries where there are public interests at stake.
So why should fishing be treated differently?
What exactly is there to hide? Because if the system
is operating responsibly, transparently, and
sustainably, then independent scrutiny
should not be feared.
Electronic monitoring is one of the few tools the public has to verify
what is actually happening at sea, including bycatch, dumping, and
compliance with the rules. Removing public access
undermines trust, weakens accountability at the exact time we should be
strengthening it. And finally, rules without
enforcement are meaningless. So we can have laws
written on paper, but if there is weak monitoring,
reduced oversight, and reliance on voluntary measures, then those
laws do become performative. It would be like setting
speed limits on roads, but removing the speeding camera,
reducing policing, and simply trusting everybody to do the right
thing. That's not how effective regulation works.
So for these reasons and many more, the Animal Justice Party does
urge this committee to reject the bill in its current form
or at the very least, undertake substantial amendments to strengthen
transparency, environmental protections, accountability,
treaty alignment, and to finally begin addressing the
destructive fishing practices such as bottom trawling. Kia ora.
Thank you for your time.
Right. Do we have any questions? Got a question.
Just want to clarify something for me, please.
Thank you for your submission, Danette.
Does the Animal Justice Party feel that humans
should be able to eat protein from animals and fish?
The Animal Justice Party would like to see us
move a just transition into a plant-based
lifestyle and economy,
and do believe that it is unnecessary, yes.
Thank you. So I need to know.
Doesn't seem to be any more questions.
So thank you very much, Danette, for your submission.
Kia ora.
Have a good day.
Thank you.
Bye. Right. We're going to move on
to Coal
ActionMurihiku.
I think we have a Jenny Campbell online.
Hi, Jenny. We can just see-
Kia ora koutou.
There we go.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee. You have 10 minutes.
The time is yours.
Fire away.
I'm working on it.
Kia ora koutou katoa. Ko Takitimu toku maunga.
Ko Reti toku awa. Ko Takitimu toku waka.
Ko Ngāi Tahu toku iwi. Ko Te Rau Aroha toku
marae. Nō Mosbourne toku kāinga. Ko Jenny Campbell
hou.
I am speaking as co-convenor of Coalition Murihiku,
CAM, along with my personal perspectives.
Thank you for the chance to present information
other than the general perspectives and comments about this proposed Fisheries
Amendment Bill,
alongside the more technical aspects we wrote about in our
online submission recently.
We commented on a wide range of changes
to the Fisheries Act 1996, including catch limit
settings, discards,
deemed value rates, availability of camera recordings,
and the time limit for lodging judicial review applications
with suggestions for changes on these proposals, all of which
seem to contradict any chances of conservation and
sustainability of already vulnerable species and their
habitats.
This proposed bill is no longer fit for purpose and requires a lot
of reform. CAM members recommend that MPs
withdraw it or vote it down at the second reading.
Instead, the government needs to establish an independent fisheries
inquiry with the aim of producing a reform
document which is fit for purpose and which will ensure
our fisheries are sustainable for now and into the future,
rather than this short-sighted biased bill.
It restricts
the
public's ability to hold the Minister of Fisheries to
account with serious implications.
Moreover, these proposed changes mean this government has lost its
social license regarding long-term sustainable care for
our precious taonga te moana. Values.
Here in Aotearoa, we have a deep connection with our moana,
where we live alongside it, holiday by it, swim
in it, connect with nature, and gather kai to feed
our whanau. Unfortunately, right now, our
moana is being overfished to the point of collapse,
with bottom trawling wreaking havoc on our precious and
unique marine habitats.
Our seabirds, such as our endangered,
precious
hoiho, yellow-eyed penguin, alongside
dolphins, especially the very vulnerable Maui and Hector's
dolphins, and other marine life, for example, sea lions
and albatross, are paying the price for destructive and
outdated fishing practices. Bottom trawling
must be banned as it is elsewhere around the world,
along with set nets.
Regional issues. We are southern people who have
seen the disastrous impacts of so many factors impacting
on several fish species in our Murihiku rohe
over many years. We are very concerned about our most
well-known oysters, blue cod, and koura species,
with depletion a major issue for both commercial and
recreational fishers.
There needs to be strict restrictions on these fish species though they
have the chance to recover. Overfishing is a major
issue as oceans are special environments and need our
protection across all types of fishing.
For example, for oysters and orange roughy, and these
numbers which are very depleted
currently. Te
Tiriti o Waitangi. This proposal shows little
consideration for honoring and giving acknowledgement of Te
Tiriti o Waitangi. Te Tiriti principles bring
with them the essential need to fully consult with Maori and the
kaupapa around solutions and understanding of
our need to work together on a consultative basis
to preserve our
unique fish endemic species, especially in our oceans and
coastal habitats.
Tangata whenua's long-term wisdom from their lived experience
here as our first nation people must be valued.
Crown policy must give full effect to Tiriti in
involving and consulting with Maori, as well as measures to
enable iwi, hapu and whanau to
exercise their rangatiratanga and kaitiaki role in
respect of taonga within their rohe, including oceans.
Responsibility.
Our main emphasis is on our moral and ethical
responsibility for these unique species, which do not have a
voice for themselves. CAM members advocate
for us all to be a voice for nature,
which is the theme for Forest and Bird, which many
of our members belong to.
Our government seems intent to prioritize commercial fishing
over the environment and non-commercial interests.
This is in sharp contrast to other countries where their
governments are providing more protection for their at-risk
species, especially in this climate change environment
and the vulnerability of our species to be able to cope with
unpredictable storms and the warming of our
seawaterMany more marine reserves are needed
in Aotearoa to provide a safe place for fish to
spawn and a nursery for the young,
and
so thrive to replenish these much sought after species.
Our Moana is in crisis, but with strong and thoughtful
action, including strong scientific knowledge, we
can protect it, so we have abundant and sustainable
seas for now and future generations, our
tamariki and mokopuna, our legacy to them.
And a pukataki I use in these
situations: Ti tiro whakamuri, ko kiri
whakamua. Look back and reflect so we can move
forward.
He iti hapunamu, it may be small, but it is very
precious. Rangimarie.
Thank you,
Jenny. Do we have any questions?
Teanau.
Tena koe, whaea Jenny. Mia ma ki a koe.
Thank you very much for your well-thought-out submission,
highlighting many important points.
You talked earlier about social license, and this is something that we did
bring up with the minister during one of his public hearings.
And I was wondering from your perspective, what would
a government which
was
honoring social license, if I can put it that way, what would that look like in
this context?
Well, I think a lot more people need to be engaged with this.
They don't realize the implications of this amendment bill,
and I'm very concerned that this legislation's going to be passed without
ordinary people like me
not being able to express our views on the implication of this
for present and future generations.
So,
yeah, it just seems to be a
roller coaster of a ride trying to get
submissions in on time and be able to consider all the
implications of the proposed
amendment bill.
Thank you. Any further questions?
No, look, I thank you very much for your submission today, Jenny.
Very much appreciate it.
We'll move on to our next submitter.
Yes, I've realized that having great-grandchildren puts a huge
amount of emphasis on my need to speak out about these things.
So thank you for listening to me and taking it into account when you're
making your decisions. Ka kite.
Thank you very much. Kia ora.
Thank you.
Right, we're moving on to Zero Carbon
Nelson Tasman,
and we have
Bruce Gilkinson and Paul Martyn, I believe.
Yes. Correct. Thank you.
Welcome to the committee.
You have 10 minutes. The time is yours.
Tena koutou. Thanks for the opportunity to speak to Zero
Carbon Nelson Tasman, that's ZCNT's written
submission.
I'm Paul Martyn, and with me is Bruce Gilkinson.
ZCNT strongly endorses the submission of the
Environmental Defense Society, EDS, and our submission
elaborates on some of their concerns.
We'd also acknowledge the many passionate submissions that support marine
biodiversity.
And while the minister states this bill will put, quote, "income, revenue,
growth, and jobs first," the reality is it risks fishing industry
income and jobs in the medium to long term due to overfishing.
This bill prioritizes short-term gains to fishing businesses
to the detriment of fish stocks and the whole marine environment.
The proposal to no longer permit OIAs to view fishing vessel
camera footage is a concerning example of prioritizing
catch over sustainability. Onboard cameras are vital to
reduce illegal discards and captures of dolphins and seabirds,
and public visibility of this footage is therefore essential.
We believe this proposed amendment will have significant detrimental
consequences and should be abandoned.
There is a huge absence of scientific research on the 400 species of
fish around New Zealand, of which only 96 are actually
currently monitored.
Evidence from annual fish catches suggests that key stocks are
declining rapidly. We must prioritize reversing this for
future generations. I'll pass over to Bruce.
Kia ora.
In general, we support the principles for setting allowable catches
and stated focus on
sustainability. However, we disagree with some of the
standard factors the minister must consider in setting
TACs, and particularly, I quote, "the
social, cultural, and economic factors that the
minister considers relevant."
This condition is so broad as to be meaningless and could work to the
detriment of fish stocks.
In setting TACs, for example, a minister might favor
short-term economic gains to be
paramount while negative impacts on fish stocks and
ecosystems might not become apparent for
some years or decades later.
It is crucial that social, cultural, or economic factors
which might give rise to short-term gains should not
eclipse medium or long-term
sustainability considerations.
Next, we want to address fishing practices and the need to
minimize negative impactsOther speakers
will or have focused on the damage done by bottom
trawling to the sea floor, breeding grounds, food
sources, and ecosystems.
However, we want to highlight the greenhouse gas emissions, not just from
dragging heavy gear over the sea floor, but especially
from the release of carbon stored in
seabed sediments into the ocean and
atmosphere.
This, in turn, adds to global heating and to
increased acidification of our seas, with both of
these impacting on marine environments, fish
stocks, and potentially the survival of some species.
Detailed studies have been carried out to quantify these emissions.
Best estimates are that worldwide,
these emissions are comparable to the carbon emissions
from the entire global aviation
industry.
Details of these studies are available if required.
This is likely to affect seas around New Zealand, particularly
where warming has been occurring at
34% faster than the global average, and
that's an MFE
2025 study.
We urge that the bill require adoption of fishing practices
which minimize damage to marine environments and
fish stocks. A phase out of bottom trawling
needs to happen, we believe, urgently,
which would be positive for ecosystems, fish stocks,
and not to mention our image in
world markets. Thank you.
So as per Forest and Bird's submission, minimum sizes lengths
must be included in any amendment.
Catching juvenile fish will lead to, and is leading to stock
collapse. While proposed discard rules are positive,
simply dumping dead fish at sea is unacceptable.
A better option may be to limit unwanted catches by ensuring trawl
mesh sizes do not
catch smaller fish, and of course, eliminating bottom trawling.
We have a significant absence of knowledge about marine species and
interactions and survivability around New Zealand.
The Hauraki Gulf example of snapper and crayfish overfishing leading to kina
barrens and kelp devastation highlights this and has already been
mentioned in other submissions. We need a whole marine
ecosystem management, not fragmented assaults on
individual fish stocks.
Another good example of that, and the most cataclysmic, was the
collapse of the Atlantic cod fishery, particularly in
1992 around Newfoundland, which
resulted in a total collapse of the cod fishing industry, which had
been there for centuries,
and it's a stark warning.
In that case, there was neither government nor fishers had adequate
data before stocks collapsed, and this is a recipe for disaster,
which we think is occurring
as we speak. Another example of our own is, of
course, the orange roughy collapse
in the
Chatham Islands. Habitat degradation from
overfishing, loss of spawning grounds, sedimentation, ocean warming are
huge issues not noted in the bill, yet vital for catch limit
decisions. New Zealand seas are warming faster, as we've said, than
anywhere globally, causing fish species to migrate south.
We know little about these impacts on fish stock management.
Rapidly warming seas are changing species mix and numbers, making them harder to
catch and challenging existing quotas.
Warmer waters increase fish mortality, disrupt food webs, and
reduce oxygen impacting snapper, hoki, and tarakihi
stocks.
The rapidly changing interactions between estuarine
areas, freshwater ways, and the ocean also need acknowledgment.
Increased sediment flow from frequent storms cover
breeding grounds and marine vegetation, as has been noted
previously. Toxic chemicals from flooding
further impact coastal breeding grounds and marine animal survivability,
depleting young fish and spawning grounds.
Decisions about catch allocations are made in the dark regarding
species sustainability for all these reasons.
Thus, TACs need to have continuous
review.
We urgently need to extend the marine protection areas into a network of
refuges because these provide the spawning grounds for
all the fish that we later catch. The bill makes no reference to their
importance. We recommend adding a clause for collaboration with the Department of
Conservation to expand MPAs to sustain and revitalize
fish stocks.
We also need greater clarity and guidelines about interactions between
recreational and commercial fishers and inshore versus
offshore trawling.
Above all, the changes proposed to fisheries in this bill are being made in a
scientific vacuum. We have no understanding of the impact on
fish stocks. The cod fisheries collapse proves that this is a
recipe for disaster.
We therefore strongly support the EDS proposal that this bill be abandoned
and an independent Royal Commission of Inquiry be implemented.
This would gain comprehensive feedback from the fishing industry, marine
research facilities, and the public to determine a sustainable
long-term way forward for managing New Zealand's marine fish stocks.
Nga mihi nui. Thank you.
Right. Thank you very much. Do we have any questions?
No.
Oh, yeah. I forgot I was going to say that.
Suze
As you know, there was widespread alarm amongst
recreational fishers regarding returning of undersized
fish to shore, and you sort of mentioned it just earlier,
that do you think that by
enforcing the return of undersized fish by commercial fishers and
counting that against their quota, that that would in fact encourage them to
mitigate the chance of catching those fish?
I think you referred to net size in your submission.
Yes. It's likely to have some positive impact.
In the long term, we need to ensure that we are
not catching undersize, and there are a variety of
methods to try to work towards that.
No process is going to be infallible, we recognize that.
But there needs to be a way to encourage
the fishing industry not to catch undersize or
non-relevant species, et cetera.
And that's a hard ask, but
ensuring that they bring all fish stock to shore is one
mechanism in that process.
Thanks, Bruce.
Thank you. We've got Teanau. Make it quick, Teanau.
Yeah. Kia ora. Thank you very much for your very solid submission.
I was just reflecting on one point that you made around
concerns
around the ministers being able to not take into account
long term and medium term impacts.
So I'm wondering
if your suggestion there is to make sure that that is kind of baked
into any legislation, so not necessarily this one or this one
completely falls over, but maybe something in the future where that medium
term to long term environmental impact must be considered,
if that's what you were proposing.
Absolutely should be
considered.
I think the point there that
it seems quite easy to override it
by
the
requirement to use social, cultural, and economic factors that the
minister
considers relevant just seem very open-ended
and,
you know,
that that
appears now to have a priority over sustainability.
I think-
Thank you, gentlemen. We're
well over time now, but I really appreciate-
See you
... your
submission, Paul and Bruce.
Thanks very much.
Much appreciated.
Right. Moving on. We've got the World Wide Fund for
Nature, and we've got Jamie Fowler and Kaitlin
Oakes.
Welcome.
Thank you.
You've been sitting there for a while, so I'm guessing you know the deal.
We do. Thank you.
All right. You have 10 minutes. Fire away.
Tena koutou katoa.
My name is Kaitlin Oakes, and alongside Acting CEO Jamie Fowler, we're
appearing on behalf of the World Wide Fund for Nature New Zealand.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
We're here because this bill matters.
It will shape the future of our oceans, our fisheries, and our communities for
generations to come.
WWF New Zealand's primary recommendation is for this bill to be withdrawn
and the policy process restarted with a full public consultation
and independent review of New Zealand's fisheries management system.
As the committee will be aware, New Zealand's marine environment is globally unique
and deeply valued. Our ocean territory is about 15 times larger
than our land mass and home to extraordinary biodiversity found nowhere else on
Earth. But our ocean is under growing pressure from overfishing,
habitat degradation, pollution, and climate change.
We are already seeing serious declines in marine species and ecosystems,
with 22% of our marine mammals and 90% of our
seabirds now threatened with extinction.
A healthy ocean is not optional. It underpins our biodiversity, our
economy, and our way of life.
WWF supports improving fisheries management because the current system isn't
working well enough. We continue to see insufficient science, inadequate
protection, and an over-reliance on single stock management
that fails to reflect the complexity of marine
ecosystems. The Fisheries Amendment Bill presents a once in a
generation opportunity to improve fisheries management in Aotearoa and
ensure our ocean thrives for generations to come.
However, this bill as it stands shifts the balance far
too far away from sustainability.
It weakens environmental safeguards, reduces transparency and
accountability, and narrows opportunities for public participation
in decisions about a shared public resource.
Today, we want to focus on three main concerns.
First, the bill's weakening of ecosystem and precautionary-based management.
Second, its reduction of transparency and public accountability.
And third, the deeply flawed process through which these reforms were developed.
Our first concern is that the bill represents a significant departure from
ecosystem-based and precautionary management.
The environmental principles in the Fisheries Act exists because of the
inextricable link between fisheries and wider impacts on marine
ecosystems. Put simply, healthy fisheries depend on and are
a part of healthy ecosystems. Yet this bill fundamentally
changes how environmental concerns are handled in fisheries decisions.
It's moving away from caution towards maximizing use, even when there is
uncertainty. And uncertainty matters in the ocean.
Ecosystems don't come with instruction manuals.
When we push too far, the consequences don't always arrive all at once.
They arrive in complex shifts in the balance over time, and
they can lead to swift collapse, often irreversibly.
We're already seeing signs of this in New Zealand waters.The
bill shifts this balance by narrowing the role of environmental
considerations, weakening obligations for setting catch limits for data
poor stocks, locking in multi-year catch decisions, and
allowing for in-season catch increases for highly variable stocks.
In our view, these changes increase risk, move us away from international best
practice, and should be removed.
The bill also encourages bulk harvesting and less selective fishing practices
like bottom trawling. As you know, one of the more contentious proposals has been
the removal of the commercial minimum legal size for some species.
While allowing the sale of undersized fish ensures the catches are counted
against quota, it also normalizes their catches,
creates a financial incentive to do so, and undermines longstanding
fisheries management that we should not be catching juvenile fish.
As the committee will be aware, there's been significant public concern on this
issue, and that's because people understand it. It's pretty common sense.
You're trading off long-term value for short-term gain.
We believe this amendment should be removed and replaced with a more
environmentally responsible approach, where undersized fish are still
counted against quota but are unable to be sold.
Other changes, as detailed in our submission, further reduce precaution
and prioritize utilization and efficiency over
ecological resilience, and we recommend they are removed.
The second concern we want to raise is the way the bill substantially reduces
transparency, public accountability, and public participation.
This is not just about science, it's also about trust.
Our fisheries are a publicly owned resource.
They are not owned by a few, but they belong to all New Zealanders.
And with a shared resource comes a fundamental principle.
We all deserve a say, we all deserve visibility, and we all deserve
accountability. Yet this bill moves us in the opposite direction.
Onboard cameras have dramatically improved transparency and
trust in the system, increasing both reporting and data
availability. However, the bill excludes camera footage from the Official
Information Act and criminalizes the release with severe penalties of up to
$50,000. Not only is this overly punitive, but it is
completely unnecessary. The OIA is a key mechanism, obviously, for
public accountability and management of a shared resource.
Existing OIA protections already manage for privacy and commercial
sensitivities. There's been no evidence of misuse under the OIA,
and removing access to footage further erodes
transparency, which in turn erodes confidence and trust.
This provision should be removed.
Further, the bill reduces consultation requirements, leaving it to the
minister to decide whether to seek public input on
non-regulatory measures proposed by quota owners and variations
to catch limits. These changes should also be removed.
The proposed 20
working day limit on judicial review is completely unreasonable in our
view. The timeframe ignores the highly complex and technical
nature of fisheries management decision, and also just goes against the officials'
advice
of three to six months. So this is a clear attempt to limit
legitimate challenges to fisheries decisions from being
properly considered and should be
removed.
The final concern we want to raise is the process through which this bill was
developed. Reforms of this scale should be built through
transparent, inclusive, and robust policy development.
That's not happened here.
The proposals were largely shaped through consultation with or engagement with
commercial fishing interests, with limited involvement from fishery scientists,
environmental groups, customary and recreational fishers, or the wider public.
As you'll be aware, when consulted on 2025, around
25,000 submissions opposed the proposals, demonstrating
significant public concern.
But when it was introduced in March, it reflected almost none of that feedback or
genuine response to concerns raised.
This has understandably undermined confidence in the bill and the process behind
it.
We've seen, as Jamie mentioned, considerable public backlash, particularly around
the minimum size provision, followed by the government reversing course
on that. In our view, that kind of raises broader questions
about whether all aspects of the bill have been properly scrutinized
before introduction.
And even with the one-week extension, the timeframe for select
committee submissions remains wholly inadequate
for legislation of this complexity and significance.
For reforms this significant, the process has simply not been good enough.
Good fisheries management depends on public trust.
That trust is weakened when major reforms are rushed, consultation is limited,
and public feedback appears to have little influence on the outcomes.
To conclude, a precautionary, science-led, and transparent fisheries
management system is essential to minimize harm to our marine
species and habitats and rebuild public trust in the system.
While we have identified amendments that should be removed, simply fixing
individual provisions alone is not enough.
Given the scale and significance of the proposed changes, the strength of
public opposition, and the poor process by which it was advanced,
WWF is of the view that the best path forward is to effectively
restart the policy development process.
That should include an independent review of the management system,
including the quota management,
followed by the development of revised proposals through full and inclusive
public consultation process. These reforms risk taking
us backward at a time when increasing pressures
exist on our marine environment. This bill is too important to rush
through without getting it right.
Future generations will live with the consequences of the decisions made here.
It is in our economic and ecological long-term interest
to hit the restart on this bill to actually ensure
sustainable fisheries that support both healthy marine
ecosystems and stable future livelihoods.
Thank you for your time today, and we welcome any questions.
Thank you very much. We've got a question from Susan, then from
Rachel. Thank you.No, I-
Oh, I thought you had a question. Sorry. Right, Rach.
Thank you.
We've heard from some submitters some examples of when it would've been useful for
them to be able to do a carryover of ACE.
Mm.
So I think the rock lobster examples, where there was one example where
they were able to and one where they weren't.
So I'm just interested in whether you would support
a clause of that nature, provided there was enough
evidence of sustainability measures being
considered.
Mm-hmm.
And so no impact on the stock,
and also potentially not 100% is the kind
of limit, right? Like if it was a small amount-
Indeed
... that was allowed to be transferred.
So your first point around
you need to have kind of an adequate level of monitoring data and to actually
understand the relationship that's kind of at play for certain species.
We actually don't have that for a lot of our species, so I think you'd have to
apply it quite judicially.
As you mentioned also, the 10% of ACE can
already be carried forward under the current system, and now it's being
proposed to be limitless, which doesn't really stack up either.
It's kind of one of those things where you turn a steady catch limit
into a future surge of pressure on a fishery system.
It's sort of like if you didn't eat for several days and then you eat two days'
worth of food the next day. It's a bit of a shock to the
system. So I think you have to be quite careful in terms of how
that's applied, and it needs to be quite tight.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
10 seconds. Oh, that's right. Well, just quickly, the cameras on
boats, right?
There's obviously, you feel it should be made public even though it's workplace.
I'm not sure I know many workplaces would like to have cameras
in their workplace and then have that
discoverable by the entire population.
Would not an alternative to the fact at the moment just the
officials are supposed to see it be to allow and then to have
the NPI audited by an independent office of Parliament,
for example, to actually then so that you could have confidence in it and
then maintain people's privacy?
Well, I think the burden of proof needs to be on why there needs
to be a change to the current system.
Under the current OAA, there hasn't been any
misuse of that footage and there are
provisions in place that protect that privacy.
So I think I'd kind of go back to the officials and say, "Why
is this actually important?
Give me examples of where this has been a problem."
And I think it just said to your point about a workplace, our fisheries are a
shared public resource, and we did see that when the cameras were introduced-
Yeah
... significant increases in-
I'm not
backing away from that. That's a very fair point, but you can get
results, right? We can get the result. Well over time.
Anyway, so
look, thank you very much for your submission. Really appreciate it.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank you for having us. Right.
We'll suspend this meeting for a half hour while you go and have
lunch. Oh, dear. I'm gone. Now. No,
you're out of here. Oh, you're out of here like a poor man.
And I've nothing